
And love Him, the which that, right for love,
Upon a cross, our soules for to bey,*                       *buy, redeem
First starf,* and rose, and sits in heav'n above;                  *died
For he will false* no wight, dare I say,                  *deceive, fail
That will his heart all wholly on him lay;
And since he best to love is, and most meek,
What needeth feigned loves for to seek?

Lo! here of paynims* cursed olde rites!                          *pagans
Lo! here what all their goddes may avail!
Lo! here this wretched worlde's appetites!               *end and reward
Lo! here the *fine and guerdon for travail,*                  of labour*
Of Jove, Apollo, Mars, and such rascaille*                  *rabble <93>
Lo! here the form of olde clerkes' speech,
In poetry, if ye their bookes seech!*                      *seek, search


L'Envoy of Chaucer.


O moral Gower! <94> this book I direct.
To thee, and to the philosophical Strode, <95>
To vouchesafe, where need is, to correct,
Of your benignities and zeales good.
And to that soothfast Christ that *starf on rood*    *died on the cross*
With all my heart, of mercy ever I pray,
And to the Lord right thus I speak and say:

"Thou One, and Two, and Three, *etern on live,*       *eternally living*
That reignest ay in Three, and Two, and One,
Uncircumscrib'd, and all may'st circumscrive,*               *comprehend
From visible and invisible fone*                                   *foes
Defend us in thy mercy ev'ry one;
So make us, Jesus, *for thy mercy dign,*           *worthy of thy mercy*
For love of Maid and Mother thine benign!"

Explicit Liber Troili et Cresseidis. <96>


Notes to Troilus and Cressida


1. The double sorrow: First his suffering before his love was
successful; and then his grief after his lady had been separated
from him, and had proved unfaithful.

2. Tisiphone: one of the Eumenides, or Furies, who avenged on
men in the next world the crimes committed on earth. Chaucer
makes this grim invocation most fitly, since the Trojans were
under the curse of the Eumenides, for their part in the offence
of Paris in carrying off Helen, the wife of his host Menelaus,
and thus impiously sinning against the laws of hospitality.

3. See Chaucer's description of himself in "The House Of
Fame," and note 11 to that poem.

4. The Palladium, or image of Pallas (daughter of Triton and
foster-sister of Athena), was said to have fallen from heaven at
Troy, where Ilus was just beginning to found the city; and Ilus
erected a sanctuary, in which it was preserved with great
honour and care, since on its safety was supposed to depend the
safety of the city. In later times a Palladium was any statue of
the goddess Athena kept for the safeguard of the city that
possessed it.

5. "Oh, very god!": oh true divinity! -- addressing Cressida.

6. Ascaunce: as if to say -- as much as to say. The word
represents "Quasi dicesse" in Boccaccio. See note 5 to the
Sompnour's Tale.

7. Eft: another reading is "oft."

8. Arten: constrain -- Latin, "arceo."

9. The song is a translation of Petrarch's 88th Sonnet, which
opens thus:
"S'amor non e, che dunque e quel ch'i'sento."

10. If maugre me: If (I burn) in spite of myself. The usual
reading is, "If harm agree me" = if my hurt contents me: but
evidently the antithesis is lost which Petrarch intended when,
after "s'a mia voglia ardo," he wrote "s'a mal mio grado" = if
against my will; and Urry's Glossary points out the probability
that in transcription the words "If that maugre me" may have
gradually changed into "If harm agre me."

11. The Third of May seems either to have possessed peculiar
favour or significance with Chaucer personally, or to have had a
special importance in connection with those May observances
of which the poet so often speaks. It is on the third night of
May that Palamon, in The Knight's Tale, breaks out of prison,
and at early morn encounters in the forest Arcita, who has gone
forth to pluck a garland in honour of May; it is on the third
night of May that the poet hears the debate of "The Cuckoo and
the Nightingale"; and again in the present passage the favoured
date recurs.

12. Went: turning; from Anglo-Saxon, "wendan;" German,
"wenden." The turning and tossing of uneasy lovers in bed is,
with Chaucer, a favourite symptom of their passion. See the
fifth "statute," in The Court of Love.

13. Procne, daughter of Pandion, king of Attica, was given to
wife to Tereus in reward for his aid against an enemy; but
Tereus dishonoured Philomela, Procne's sister; and his wife, in
revenge, served up to him the body of his own child by her.
Tereus, infuriated, pursued the two sisters, who prayed the
gods to change them into birds. The prayer was granted;
Philomela became a nightingale, Procne a swallow, and Tereus
a hawk.

14. Fished fair: a proverbial phrase which probably may be best
represented by the phrase "done great execution."

15. The fair gem virtueless:  possessing none of the virtues
which in the Middle Ages were universally believed to be
inherent in precious stones.

16. The crop and root: the most perfect example. See note 29
to the Knight's Tale.

17. Eme: uncle; the mother's brother; still used in Lancashire.
Anglo-Saxon, "eame;" German, "Oheim."

18. Dardanus: the mythical ancestor of the Trojans, after whom
the gate is supposed to be called.

19. All the other gates were secured with chains, for better
defence against the besiegers.

20. Happy day:  good fortune; French, "bonheur;" both "happy
day" and "happy hour" are borrowed from the astrological
fiction about the influence of the time of birth.

21. Horn, and nerve, and rind: The various layers or materials
of the shield -- called boagrion in the Iliad -- which was made
from the hide of the wild bull.

22. His brother:  Hector.

23. Who gives me drink?: Who has given me a love-potion, to
charm my heart thus away?

24. That plaited she full oft in many a fold: She deliberated
carefully, with many arguments this way and that.

25. Through which I mighte stand in worse plight: in a worse
position in the city; since she might through his anger lose the
protection of his brother Hector.

26. I am not religious: I am not in holy vows. See the complaint
of the nuns in "The Court of Love."

27. The line recalls Milton's "dark with excessive bright."

28. No weal is worth, that may no sorrow drien: the meaning is,
that whosoever cannot endure sorrow deserves not happiness.

29. French, "verre;" glass.

30. From cast of stones ware him in the werre: let him beware
of casting stones in battle. The proverb in its modern form
warns those who live in glass houses of the folly of throwing
stones.

31. Westren:  to west or wester -- to decline towards the west;
so Milton speaks of the morning star as sloping towards
heaven's descent "his westering wheel."

32. A pike with ass's feet etc.: this is merely another version of
the well-known example of incongruity that opens the "Ars
Poetica" of Horace.

33. Tristre: tryst; a preconcerted spot to which the beaters
drove the game, and at which the sportsmen waited with their
bows.

34. A kankerdort: a condition or fit of perplexed anxiety;
probably connected with the word "kink" meaning in sea phrase
a twist in an rope -- and, as a verb, to twist or entangle.

35. They feel in times, with vapour etern: they feel in their
seasons, by the emission of an eternal breath or inspiration (that
God loves, &c.)

36. The idea of this stanza is the same with that developed in
the speech of Theseus at the close of The Knight's Tale; and it is
probably derived from the lines of Boethius, quoted in note 91
to that Tale.

37. In this and the following lines reappears the noble doctrine
of the exalting and purifying influence of true love, advanced in
"The Court of Love," "The Cuckoo and the Nightingale," &c.

38. Weir: a trap or enclosed place in a stream, for catching fish.
See note 10 to The Assembly of Fowls.

39. Nor might one word for shame to it say: nor could he
answer one word for shame (at the stratagem that brought
Cressida to implore his protection)

40. "All n'ere he malapert, nor made avow
     Nor was so bold to sing a foole's mass;"
i.e. although he was not over-forward and made no confession
(of his love), or was so bold as to be rash and ill-advised in his
declarations of love and worship.

41. Pandarus wept as if he would turn to water; so, in The
Squire's Tale, did Canace weep for the woes of the falcon.

42. If I breake your defence: if I transgress in whatever you may
forbid; French, "defendre," to prohibit.

43. These lines and the succeeding stanza are addressed to
Pandarus, who had interposed some words of incitement to
Cressida.

44.  In "The Court of Love," the poet says of Avaunter, that
"his ancestry of kin was to Lier; and the stanza in which that
line occurs  expresses precisely the same idea as in the text.
Vain boasters  of ladies' favours are also satirised in "The House
of Fame".

45. Nice:  silly, stupid; French, "niais."

46."Reheating" is read by preference for "richesse," which
stands in the older printed editions; though "richesse" certainly
better represents the word used in the original of Boccaccio --
"dovizia," meaning abundance or wealth.

47. "Depart it so, for widewhere is wist
     How that there is diversity requer'd
     Betwixte thinges like, as I have lear'd:"
i.e. make this distinction, for it is universally known that there is
a great difference between things that seem the same, as I have
learned.

48. Frepe: the set, or company; French, "frappe," a stamp (on
coins), a set (of moulds).

49. To be "in the wind" of noisy magpies, or other birds that
might spoil sport by alarming the game, was not less desirable
than to be on the "lee-side" of the game itself, that the hunter's
presence might not be betrayed by the scent. "In the wind of,"
thus signifies not to windward of, but to leeward of -- that is, in
the wind that comes from the object of pursuit.

50. Bothe fremd and tame: both foes and friends -- literally,
both wild and tame, the sporting metaphor being sustained.

51. The lovers are supposed to say, that nothing is wanting but
to know the time at which they should meet.

52. A  tale of Wade: see note 5 to the Merchant's Tale.

53. Saturn, and Jove, in Cancer joined were: a conjunction that
imported rain.

54. Smoky rain: An admirably graphic description of dense rain.

55. For the force of "cold," see note 22 to the Nun's Priest's
Tale.

56. Goddes seven:  The divinities who gave their names to the
seven planets, which, in association with the seven metals, are
mentioned in The Canon's Yeoman's Tale.

57. Assayed:  experienced, tasted. See note 6 to the Squire's
Tale.

58. Now is it better than both two were lorn: better this happy
issue, than that both two should be lost (through the sorrow of
fruitless love).

59. Made him such feast: French, "lui fit fete" -- made holiday
for him.

60. The cock is called, in "The Assembly of Fowls," "the
horologe of thorpes lite;" [the clock of little villages] and in The
Nun's Priest's Tale Chanticleer knew by nature each ascension
of the equinoctial, and, when the sun had ascended fifteen
degrees, "then crew he, that it might not be amended." Here he
is termed the "common astrologer," as employing for the public
advantage his knowledge of astronomy.

61. Fortuna Major: the planet Jupiter.

62. When Jupiter visited Alcmena in the form of her husband
Amphitryon, he is said to have prolonged the night to the length
of three natural nights. Hercules was the fruit of the union.

63. Chaucer seems to confound Titan, the title of the sun, with
Tithonus (or Tithon, as contracted in poetry), whose couch
Aurora was wont to share.

64. So, in "Locksley Hall," Tennyson says that "a sorrow's
crown of sorrow is rememb'ring better things." The original is in
Dante's words:- -
"Nessun maggior dolore
 Che ricordarsi del tempo felice
 Nella miseria." -- "Inferno," v. 121.
("There is no greater sorrow than to remember happy times
when in misery")

65. As great a craft is to keep weal as win: it needs as much
skill to keep prosperity as to attain it.

66. To heap: together. See the reference to Boethius in note 91
to the Knight's Tale.

67. The smalle beastes let he go beside: a charming touch,
indicative of the noble and generous inspiration of his love.

68. Mew: the cage or chamber in which hawks were kept and
carefully tended during the moulting season.

69. Love of steel:  love as true as steel.

70. Pandarus, as it repeatedly appears, was an unsucsessful
lover.

71. "Each for his virtue holden is full dear,
     Both heroner, and falcon for rivere":--
That is, each is esteemed for a special virtue or faculty, as the
large gerfalcon for the chase of heron, the smaller goshawk for
the chase of river fowl.

72. Zausis: An author of whom no record survives.

73. And upon new case lieth new advice:  new counsels must be
adopted as new circumstances arise.

74. Hid in mew: hidden in a place remote from the world -- of
which Pandarus thus betrays ignorance.

75. The modern phrase "sixes and sevens," means "in
confusion:" but here the idea of gaming perhaps suits the sense
better -- "set the world upon a cast of the dice."

76. The controversy between those who maintained the doctrine
of predestination and those who held that of free-will raged
with no less animation at Chaucer's day, and before it, than it
has done in the subsequent five centuries; the Dominicans
upholding the sterner creed, the Franciscans taking the other
side. Chaucer has more briefly, and with the same care not to
commit himself, referred to the discussion in The Nun's Priest's
Tale.

77. That have their top full high and smooth y-shore: that are
eminent among the clergy, who wear the tonsure.

78. Athamante: Athamas, son of Aeolus; who, seized with
madness, under the wrath of Juno for his neglect of his wife
Nephele, slew his son Learchus.

79. Simois:  one of the rivers of the Troad, flowing into the
Xanthus.

80. Troilus was the son of Priam and Hecuba.

81. The son of Tydeus:  Diomedes; far oftener called Tydides,
after his father Tydeus, king of Argos.

82. Couthe more than the creed:  knew more than the mere
elements (of the science of Love).

83. Arache: wrench away, unroot (French, "arracher"); the
opposite of "enrace," to root in, implant.

84. It will be remembered that, at the beginning of the first
book, Cressida is introduced to us as a widow.

85. Diomede is called "sudden," for the unexpectedness of his
assault on Cressida's heart -- or, perhaps, for the abrupt
abandonment of his indifference to love.

86. Penscel:  a pennon or pendant; French, "penoncel." It  was
the custom in chivalric times for a knight to wear, on days of
tournament or in battle, some such token of his lady's favour, or
badge of his service to her.

87. She has been told that Troilus is deceiving her.

88. The Roman kalends were the first day of the month, when a
change of weather was usually expected.

89. Maker, and making, words used in the Middle Ages to
signify the composer and the composition of poetry, correspond
exactly with the Greek "poietes" and "poiema," from "poieo," I
make.

90. My rather speech:  my earlier, former subject; "rather" is the
cormparative of the old adjective "rath," early.

91. Up to the hollowness of the seventh sphere: passing up
through the hollowness or concavity of the spheres, which all
revolve round each other and are all contained by God (see note
5 to the Assembly of Fowls), the soul of Troilus, looking
downward, beholds the converse or convex side of the spheres
which it has traversed.

92. Sorted: allotted; from Latin, "sors," lot, fortune.

93. Rascaille: rabble; French, "racaille" -- a mob or multitude,
the riff-raff; so Spencer speaks of the "rascal routs" of inferior
combatants.

94. John Gower, the poet, a contemporary and friend of
Chaucer's; author, among other works, of the "Confessio
Amantis." See note 1 to the Man of Law's Tale.

95. Strode was an eminent scholar of Merton College, Oxford,
and tutor to Chaucer's son Lewis.

96. Explicit Liber Troili et Cresseidis: "The end of the book of
Troilus and Cressida."



CHAUCER'S DREAM.


[This pretty allegory, or rather conceit, containing one or two
passages that for vividness and for delicacy yield to nothing in
the whole range of Chaucer's poetry, had never been printed
before the year 1597, when it was included in the edition of
Speght. Before that date, indeed, a Dream of Chaucer had been
printed; but the poem so described was in reality "The Book of
the Duchess; or the Death of Blanche, Duchess of Lancaster" --
which is not included in the present edition. Speght says that 
"This Dream, devised by Chaucer, seemeth to be a covert report
of the marriage of John of Gaunt, the King's son, with Blanche,
the daughter of Henry, Duke of Lancaster; who after long love
(during the time whereof the poet feigneth them to be dead)
were in the end, by consent of friends, happily married; figured
by a bird bringing in his bill an herb, which restored them to life
again. Here also is showed Chaucer's match with a certain
gentlewoman, who, although she was a stranger, was,
notwithstanding, so well liked and loved of the Lady Blanche
and her Lord, as Chaucer himself also was, that gladly they
concluded a marriage between them." John of Gaunt, at the age
of nineteen, and while yet Earl of Richmond, was married to the
Lady Blanche at Reading in May 1359; Chaucer, then a prisoner
in France, probably did not return to England till peace was
concluded in the following year; so that his marriage to Philippa
Roet, the sister of the Duchess Blanche's favourite attendant
Katharine Roet, could not have taken place till some time after
that of the Duke. In the poem, it is represented to have
immediately followed; but no consequence need be attached to
that statement. Enough that it followed at no great interval of
time; and that the intimate relations which Chaucer had already
begun to form with John of Gaunt, might well warrant him in
writing this poem on the occasion of the Duke's marriage, and
in weaving his own love-fortunes with those of the principal
figures. In the necessary abridgement of the poem for the
present edition, the subsidiary branch of the allegory, relating to
the poet's own love affair, has been so far as possible separated
from the main branch, which shadows forth the fortunes of John
and Blanche. The poem, in full, contains, with an "Envoy"
arbitrarily appended, 2233 lines; of which 510 are given here.]
(Transcriber's note: modern scholars believe that Chaucer was
not the author of this poem)


WHEN Flora, the queen of pleasance,
Had wholly *achiev'd the obeisance*                  *won the obedience*
Of the fresh and the new season,
Thorough ev'ry region;
And with her mantle *whole covert*                      *wholly covered*
What winter had *made discovert,* --                          *stripped*

On a May night, the poet lay alone, thinking of his lady, and all
her beauty; and, falling asleep, he dreamed that he was in an
island

Where wall, and gate, was all of glass,
And so was closed round about,
That leaveless* none came in nor out;                *without permission
Uncouth and strange to behold;
For ev'ry gate, of fine gold,
A thousand fanes,* ay turning,                      *vanes, weathercocks
Entuned* had, and birds singing                 *contrived so as to emit
Diversely, on each fane a pair,                          a musical sound
With open mouth, against the air; <1>
And *of a suit* were all the tow'rs,                  *of the same plan*
Subtilly *carven aft* flow'rs                      *carved to represent*
Of uncouth colours, *during ay,*                       *lasting forever*
That never be none seen in May,
With many a small turret high;
But man alive I could not sigh,*                                    *see
Nor creatures, save ladies play,*                 *disporting themselves
Which were such of their array,
That, as me thought, *of goodlihead*                    *for comeliness*
They passed all, and womanhead.
For to behold them dance and sing,
It seemed like none earthly thing;

And all were of the same age, save one; who was advanced in
years, though no less gay in demeanour than the rest. While he
stood admiring the richness and beauty of the place, and the
fairness of the ladies, which had the notable gift of enduring 
unimpaired till death, the poet was accosted by the old lady, to
whom he had to yield himself prisoner; because the ordinance of
the isle was, that no man should dwell there; and the ladies' fear
of breaking the law was enhanced by the temporary absence of
their queen from the realm. Just at this moment the cry was
raised that the queen came; all the ladies hastened to meet her;
and soon the poet saw her approach -- but in her company his
mistress, wearing the same garb, and a seemly knight. All the
ladies wondered greatly at this; and the queen explained:

"My sisters, how it hath befall,*                              *befallen
I trow ye know it one and all,
That of long time here have I been
Within this isle biding as queen,
Living at ease, that never wight
More perfect joye have not might;
And to you been of governance
Such as you found in whole pleasance, <2>
In every thing as ye know,
After our custom and our law;
Which how they firste founded were,
I trow ye wot all the mannere.
And who the queen is of this isle, --
As I have been this longe while, --
Each seven years must, of usage,
Visit the heav'nly hermitage,
Which on a rock so highe stands,
In a strange sea, out from all lands,
That for to make the pilgrimage
Is call'd a perilous voyage;
For if the wind be not good friend,
The journey dureth to the end
Of him which that it undertakes;
Of twenty thousand not one scapes.
Upon which rock groweth a tree,
That certain years bears apples three;
Which three apples whoso may have,
Is *from all displeasance y-save*                   *safe from all pain*
That in the seven years may fall;
This wot you well, both one and all.
For the first apple and the hext,*                          *highest <3>
Which groweth unto you the next,
Hath three virtues notable,
And keepeth youth ay durable,
Beauty, and looks, ever-in-one,*                            *continually
And is the best of ev'ry one.
The second apple, red and green,
Only with lookes of your eyne,
You nourishes in great pleasance,
Better than partridge or fesaunce,*                            *pheasant
And feedeth ev'ry living wight
Pleasantly, only with the sight.
And the third apple of the three,
Which groweth lowest on the tree,
Whoso it beareth may not fail*                     *miss, fail to obtain
That* to his pleasance may avail.                            *that which
So your pleasure and beauty rich,
Your during youth ever y-lich,*                                   *alike
Your truth, your cunning,* and your weal,                     *knowledge
Hath flower'd ay, and your good heal,
Without sickness or displeasance,
Or thing that to you was noyance.*                      *offence, injury
So that you have as goddesses
Lived above all princesses.
Now is befall'n, as ye may see;
To gather these said apples three,
I have not fail'd, against the day,
Thitherward to take the way,
*Weening to speed* as I had oft.                  *expecting to succeed*
But when I came, I found aloft
My sister, which that hero stands,
Having those apples in her hands,
Advising* them, and nothing said,                  *regarding, gazing on
But look'd as she were *well apaid:*                         *satisfied*
And as I stood her to behold,
Thinking how my joys were cold,
Since I these apples *have not might,*                  *might not have*
Even with that so came this knight,
And in his arms, of me unware,
Me took, and to his ship me bare,
And said, though him I ne'er had seen,
Yet had I long his lady been;
Wherefore I shoulde with him wend,
And he would, to his life's end,
My servant be; and gan to sing,
As one that had won a rich thing.
Then were my spirits from me gone,
So suddenly every one,
That in me appear'd but death,
For I felt neither life nor breath,
Nor good nor harme none I knew,
The sudden pain me was so new,
That *had not the hasty grace be*               *had it not been for the
Of this lady, that from the tree                        prompt kindness*
Of her gentleness so bled,*                                    *hastened
Me to comforten, I had died;
And of her three apples she one
Into mine hand there put anon,
Which brought again my mind and breath,
And me recover'd from the death.
Wherefore to her so am I hold,*                       *beholden, obliged
That for her all things do I wo'ld,
For she was leach* of all my smart,                           *physician
And from great pain so quit* my heart.                        *delivered
And as God wot, right as ye hear,
Me to comfort with friendly cheer,
She did her prowess and her might.
And truly eke so did this knight,
In that he could; and often said,
That of my woe he was *ill paid,*              *distressed, ill-pleased*
And curs'd the ship that him there brought,
The mast, the master that it wrought.
And, as each thing must have an end,
My sister here, our bother friend, <4>
Gan with her words so womanly
This knight entreat, and cunningly,
For mine honour and hers also,
And said that with her we should go
Both in her ship, where she was brought,
Which was so wonderfully wrought,
So clean, so rich, and so array'd,
That we were both content and paid;*                          *satisfied
And me to comfort and to please,
And my heart for to put at ease,
She took great pain in little while,
And thus hath brought us to this isle
As ye may see; wherefore each one
I pray you thank her one and one,
As heartily as ye can devise,
Or imagine in any wise."

At once there then men mighte see'n,
A world of ladies fall on kneen
Before my lady, --

Thanking her, and placing themselves at her commandment.
Then the queen sent the aged lady to the knight, to learn of him
why he had done her all this woe; and when the messenger had
discharged her mission, telling the knight that in the general
opinion he had done amiss, he fell down suddenly as if dead for
sorrow and repentance. Only with great difficulty, by the queen
herself, was he restored to consciousness and comfort; but
though she spoke kind and hope-inspiring words, her heart was
not in her speech,

For her intent was, to his barge
Him for to bring against the eve,
With certain ladies, and take leave,
And pray him, of his gentleness,
To *suffer her* thenceforth in peace,                    *let her dwell*
As other princes had before;
And from thenceforth, for evermore,
She would him worship in all wise
That gentlenesse might devise;
And *pain her* wholly to fulfil,               *make her utmost efforts*
In honour, his pleasure and will.

And during thus this knighte's woe, --
Present* the queen and other mo',                *(there being) present*
My lady and many another wight, --
Ten thousand shippes at a sight
I saw come o'er the wavy flood,
With sail and oar; that, as I stood
Them to behold, I gan marvail
From whom might come so many a sail;
For, since the time that I was born,
Such a navy therebeforn
Had I not seen, nor so array'd,
That for the sight my hearte play'd
Ay to and fro within my breast;
For joy long was ere it would rest.
For there were sailes *full of flow'rs;*      *embroidered with flowers*
After, castles with huge tow'rs, <5>
Seeming full of armes bright,
That wond'rous lusty* was the sight;                           *pleasant
With large tops, and mastes long,
Richly depaint' and *rear'd among.*                  *raised among them*
At certain times gan repair
Smalle birdes down from the air,
And on the shippes' bounds* about                              *bulwarks
Sat and sang, with voice full out,
Ballads and lays right joyously,
As they could in their harmony.

The ladies were alarmed and sorrow-stricken at sight of the
ships, thinking that the knight's companions were on board; and
they went towards the walls of the isle, to shut the gates. But it
was Cupid who came; and he had already landed, and marched
straight to the place where the knight lay. Then he chid the
queen for her unkindness to his servant; shot an arrow into her
heart; and passed through the crowd, until he found the poet's
lady, whom he saluted and complimented, urging her to have
pity on him that loved her. While the poet, standing apart, was
revolving all this in his mind, and resolving truly to serve his
lady, he saw the queen advance to Cupid, with a petition in
which she besought forgiveness of past offences, and promised
continual and zealous service till her death. Cupid smiled, and
said that he would be king within that island, his new conquest;
then, after long conference with the queen, he called a council
for the morrow, of all who chose to wear his colours. In the
morning, such was the press of ladies, that scarcely could
standing-room be found in all the plain. Cupid presided; and one
of his counsellors addressed the mighty crowd, promising that
ere his departure his lord should bring to an agreement all the
parties there present. Then Cupid gave to the knight and the
dreamer each his lady; promised his favour to all the others in
that place who would truly and busily serve in love; and at
evening took his departure. Next morning, having declined the
proffered sovereignty of the island, the poet's mistress also
embarked, leaving him behind; but he dashed through the
waves, was drawn on board her ship from peril of death, and
graciously received into his lady's lasting favour. Here the poet
awakes, finding his cheeks and body all wet with tears; and,
removing into another chamber, to rest more in peace, he falls
asleep anew, and continues the dream. Again he is within the
island, where the knight and all the ladies are assembled on a
green, and it is resolved by the assembly, not only that the
knight shall be their king, but that every lady there shall be
wedded also. It is determined that the knight shall depart that
very day, and return, within ten days, with such a host of
Benedicts, that none in the isle need lack husbands. The knight

Anon into a little barge
Brought was, late against an eve,
Where of all he took his leave.
Which barge was, as a man thought,
Aft* his pleasure to him brought;                         *according to*
The queen herself accustom'd ay
In the same barge to play.*                              *take her sport
It needed neither mast nor rother*                               *rudder
(I have not heard of such another),
Nor master for the governance;*                                *steering
It sailed by thought and pleasance,
Withoute labour, east and west;
All was one, calm or tempest. <6>
And I went with, at his request,
And was the first pray'd to the feast.*                *the bridal feast
When he came unto his country,
And passed had the wavy sea,
In a haven deep and large
He left his rich and noble barge,
And to the court, shortly to tell,
He went, where he was wont to dwell, --

And was gladly received as king by the estates of the land; for
during his absence his father, "old, and wise, and hoar," had
died, commending to their fidelity his absent son. The prince
related to the estates his journey, and his success in finding the
princess in quest of whom he had gone seven years before; and
said that he must have sixty thousand guests at his marriage
feast. The lords gladly guaranteed the number within the set
time; but afterwards they found that fifteen days must be spent
in the necessary preparations. Between shame and sorrow, the
prince, thus compelled to break his faith, took to his bed, and,
in wailing and self-reproach,

-- Endur'd the days fifteen,
Till that the lords, on an evene,*                              *evening
Him came and told they ready were,
And showed in few wordes there,
How and what wise they had *purvey'd                  *provided suitably
For his estate,* and to him said,                           to his rank*
That twenty thousand knights of name,
And forty thousand without blame,
Alle come of noble ligne*                                 *line, lineage
Together in a company
Were lodged on a river's side,
Him and his pleasure there t'abide.
The prince then for joy uprose,
And, where they lodged were, he goes,
Withoute more, that same night,
And there his supper *made to dight;*                     *had prepared*
And with them bode* till it was day.                     *abode, waited*
And forthwith to take his journey,
Leaving the strait, holding the large,
Till he came to his noble barge:
And when the prince, this lusty knight,
With his people in armes bright,
Was come where he thought to pass,*                   *cross to the isle
And knew well none abiding was
Behind, but all were there present,
Forthwith anon all his intent
He told them there, and made his cries*                    *proclamation
Thorough his hoste that day twice,
Commanding ev'ry living wight
There being present in his sight,
To be the morrow on the rivage,*                                  *shore
There he begin would his voyage.

The morrow come, the *cry was kept*            *proclamation was obeyed*
But few were there that night that slept,
But *truss'd and purvey'd* for the morrow;      *packed up and provided*
For fault* of ships was all their sorrow;                *lack, shortage
For, save the barge, and other two,
Of shippes there I saw no mo'.
Thus in their doubtes as they stood,
Waxing the sea, coming the flood,
Was cried "To ship go ev'ry wight!"
Then was but *hie that hie him might,*       *whoever could hasten, did*
And to the barge, me thought, each one
They went, without was left not one,
Horse, nor male*, truss, nor baggage,                     *trunk, wallet
Salad*, spear, gardebrace,** nor page,        *helmet<7> **arm-shield<8>
But was lodged and room enough;
At which shipping me thought I lough,*                          *laughed
And gan to marvel in my thought,
How ever such a ship was wrought.*                          *constructed
For *what people that can increase,*     *however the numbers increased*
Nor ne'er so thick might be the prease,*                   *press, crowd
But alle hadde room at will;
There was not one was lodged ill.
For, as I trow, myself the last
Was one, and lodged by the mast;
And where I look'd I saw such room
As all were lodged in a town.
Forth went the ship, said was the creed;<9>
And on their knees, *for their good speed,*        *to pray for success*
Down kneeled ev'ry wight a while,
And prayed fast that to the isle
They mighte come in safety,
The prince and all the company.
With worship and withoute blame,
Or disclander* of his name,                           *reproach, slander
Of the promise he should return
Within the time he did sojourn
In his lande biding* his host;                              *waiting for
This was their prayer least and most:
To keep the day it might not be'n,
That he appointed with the queen.

Wherefore the prince slept neither day nor night, till he and his
people landed on the glass-walled isle, "weening to be in heav'n
that night." But ere they had gone a little way, they met a lady
all in black, with piteous countenance, who reproached the
prince for his untruth, and informed him that, unable to bear the
reproach to their name, caused by the lightness of their trust in
strangers, the queen and all the ladies of the isle had vowed
neither to eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor speak, nor cease
weeping till all were dead. The queen had died the first; and half
of the other ladies had already "under the earth ta'en lodging
new." The woeful recorder of all these woes invites the prince
to behold the queen's hearse:

"Come within, come see her hearse
Where ye shall see the piteous sight
That ever yet was shown to knight;
For ye shall see ladies stand,
Each with a greate rod in hand,
Clad in black, with visage white,
Ready each other for to smite,
If any be that will not weep;
Or who makes countenance to sleep.
They be so beat, that all so blue
They be as cloth that dy'd is new."

Scarcely has the lady ceased to speak, when the prince plucks
forth a dagger, plunges it into his heart, and, drawing but one
breath, expires.

For whiche cause the lusty host,
Which [stood] in battle on the coast,
At once for sorrow such a cry
Gan rear, thorough* the company,                             *throughout
That to the heav'n heard was the soun',
And under th'earth as far adown,
And wilde beastes for the fear
So suddenly affrayed* were,                                      *afraid
That for the doubt, while they might dure,*     *have a chance of safety
They ran as of their lives unsure,
From the woodes into the plain,
And from valleys the high mountain
They sought, and ran as beastes blind,
That clean forgotten had their kind.*                            *nature

The lords of the laggard host ask the woebegone lady what
should be done; she answers that nothing can now avail, but
that for remembrance they should build in their land, open to
public view, "in some notable old city," a chapel engraved with
some memorial of the queen. And straightway, with a sigh, she
also "pass'd her breath."

Then said the lordes of the host,
And so concluded least and most,
That they would ay in houses of thack*                           *thatch
Their lives lead, <10> and wear but black,
And forsake all their pleasances,
And turn all joy to penances;
And bare the dead prince to the barge,
And named *them should* have the charge;              *those who should*
And to the hearse where lay the queen
The remnant went, and down on kneen,
Holding their hands on high, gan cry,
"Mercy! mercy!" *evereach thry;*                       *each one thrice*
And curs'd the time that ever sloth
Should have such masterdom of troth.
And to the barge, a longe mile,
They bare her forth; and, in a while,
All the ladies, one and one,
By companies were brought each one.
And pass'd the sea, and took the land,
And in new hearses, on a sand,
Put and brought were all anon,
Unto a city clos'd with stone,
Where it had been used ay
The kinges of the land to lay,
After they reigned in honours;
And writ was which were conquerours;
In an abbey of nunnes black,
Which accustom'd were to wake,
And of usage rise each a-night,
To pray for ev'ry living wight.
And so befell, as is the guise,
Ordain'd and said was the service
Of the prince and eke of the queen,
So devoutly as mighte be'n;
And, after that, about the hearses,
Many orisons and verses,
Withoute note* <11> full softely                                  *music
Said were, and that full heartily;
That all the night, till it was day,
The people in the church gan pray
Unto the Holy Trinity,
Of those soules to have pity.

And when the nighte past and run
Was, and the newe day begun, --
The young morrow with rayes red,
Which from the sun all o'er gan spread,
Attemper'd* cleare was and fair,                          *clement, calm
And made a time of wholesome air, --
Befell a wondrous case* and strange                       *chance, event
Among the people, and gan change
Soon the word, and ev'ry woe
Unto a joy, and some to two.

A bird, all feather'd blue and green,
With brighte rays like gold between,
As small thread over ev'ry joint,
All full of colour strange and coint,*                           *quaint
Uncouth* and wonderful to sight,                             *unfamiliar
Upon the queene's hearse gan light,
And sung full low and softely
Three songes in their harmony,
*Unletted of* every wight;                               *unhindered by*
Till at the last an aged knight,
Which seem'd a man in greate thought,
Like as he set all thing at nought,
With visage and eyes all forwept,*                     *steeped in tears
And pale, as a man long unslept,
By the hearses as he stood,
With hasty handling of his hood
Unto a prince that by him past,
Made the bird somewhat aghast.*                              *frightened
Wherefore he rose and left his song,
And departed from us among,
And spread his winges for to pass
By the place where he enter'd was.
And in his haste, shortly to tell,
Him hurt, that backward down he fell,
From a window richly paint,
With lives of many a divers saint,
And beat his winges and bled fast,
And of the hurt thus died and past;
And lay there well an hour and more
Till, at the last, of birds a score
Came and assembled at the place
Where the window broken was,
And made such waimentatioun,*                               *lamentation
That pity was to hear the soun',
And the warbles of their throats,
And the complaint of their notes,
Which from joy clean was reversed.
And of them one the glass soon pierced,
And in his beak, of colours nine,
An herb he brought, flow'rless, all green,
Full of smalle leaves, and plain,*                               *smooth
Swart,* and long, with many a vein.                               *black
And where his fellow lay thus dead,
This herb he down laid by his head,
And dressed* it full softely,                                  *arranged
And hung his head, and stood thereby.
Which herb, in less than half an hour,
Gan over all knit,* and after flow'r                                *bud
Full out; and waxed ripe the seed;
And, right as one another feed
Would, in his beak he took the grain,
And in his fellow's beak certain
It put, and thus within the third*             *i.e. third hour after it
Upstood and pruned him the bird,                                had died
Which dead had been in all our sight;
And both together forth their flight
Took, singing, from us, and their leave;
Was none disturb them would nor grieve.
And, when they parted were and gone,
Th' abbess the seedes soon each one
Gathered had, and in her hand
The herb she took, well avisand*                       *considering <12>
