four times, and I waited to hear some answers in a human voice, but I
heard no other returns than in the same dialect, only one or two a little
shriller than his.  I began to think that this house must belong to some
person of great note among them, because there appeared so much ceremony
before I could gain admittance.  But, that a man of quality should be
served all by horses, was beyond my comprehension.  I feared my brain was
disturbed by my sufferings and misfortunes.  I roused myself, and looked
about me in the room where I was left alone: this was furnished like the
first, only after a more elegant manner.  I rubbed my eyes often, but the
same objects still occurred.  I pinched my arms and sides to awake
myself, hoping I might be in a dream.  I then absolutely concluded, that
all these appearances could be nothing else but necromancy and magic.
But I had no time to pursue these reflections; for the gray horse came to
the door, and made me a sign to follow him into the third room where I
saw a very comely mare, together with a colt and foal, sitting on their
haunches upon mats of straw, not unartfully made, and perfectly neat and
clean.

The mare soon after my entrance rose from her mat, and coming up close,
after having nicely observed my hands and face, gave me a most
contemptuous look; and turning to the horse, I heard the word _Yahoo_
often repeated betwixt them; the meaning of which word I could not then
comprehend, although it was the first I had learned to pronounce.  But I
was soon better informed, to my everlasting mortification; for the horse,
beckoning to me with his head, and repeating the _hhuun_, _hhuun_, as he
did upon the road, which I understood was to attend him, led me out into
a kind of court, where was another building, at some distance from the
house.  Here we entered, and I saw three of those detestable creatures,
which I first met after my landing, feeding upon roots, and the flesh of
some animals, which I afterwards found to be that of asses and dogs, and
now and then a cow, dead by accident or disease.  They were all tied by
the neck with strong withes fastened to a beam; they held their food
between the claws of their fore feet, and tore it with their teeth.

The master horse ordered a sorrel nag, one of his servants, to untie the
largest of these animals, and take him into the yard.  The beast and I
were brought close together, and by our countenances diligently compared
both by master and servant, who thereupon repeated several times the word
_Yahoo_.  My horror and astonishment are not to be described, when I
observed in this abominable animal, a perfect human figure: the face of
it indeed was flat and broad, the nose depressed, the lips large, and the
mouth wide; but these differences are common to all savage nations, where
the lineaments of the countenance are distorted, by the natives suffering
their infants to lie grovelling on the earth, or by carrying them on
their backs, nuzzling with their face against the mothers’ shoulders.
The fore-feet of the _Yahoo_ differed from my hands in nothing else but
the length of the nails, the coarseness and brownness of the palms, and
the hairiness on the backs.  There was the same resemblance between our
feet, with the same differences; which I knew very well, though the
horses did not, because of my shoes and stockings; the same in every part
of our bodies except as to hairiness and colour, which I have already
described.

The great difficulty that seemed to stick with the two horses, was to see
the rest of my body so very different from that of a _Yahoo_, for which I
was obliged to my clothes, whereof they had no conception.  The sorrel
nag offered me a root, which he held (after their manner, as we shall
describe in its proper place) between his hoof and pastern; I took it in
my hand, and, having smelt it, returned it to him again as civilly as I
could.  He brought out of the _Yahoos_’ kennel a piece of ass’s flesh;
but it smelt so offensively that I turned from it with loathing: he then
threw it to the _Yahoo_, by whom it was greedily devoured.  He afterwards
showed me a wisp of hay, and a fetlock full of oats; but I shook my head,
to signify that neither of these were food for me.  And indeed I now
apprehended that I must absolutely starve, if I did not get to some of my
own species; for as to those filthy _Yahoos_, although there were few
greater lovers of mankind at that time than myself, yet I confess I never
saw any sensitive being so detestable on all accounts; and the more I
came near them the more hateful they grew, while I stayed in that
country.  This the master horse observed by my behaviour, and therefore
sent the _Yahoo_ back to his kennel.  He then put his fore-hoof to his
mouth, at which I was much surprised, although he did it with ease, and
with a motion that appeared perfectly natural, and made other signs, to
know what I would eat; but I could not return him such an answer as he
was able to apprehend; and if he had understood me, I did not see how it
was possible to contrive any way for finding myself nourishment.  While
we were thus engaged, I observed a cow passing by, whereupon I pointed to
her, and expressed a desire to go and milk her.  This had its effect; for
he led me back into the house, and ordered a mare-servant to open a room,
where a good store of milk lay in earthen and wooden vessels, after a
very orderly and cleanly manner.  She gave me a large bowlful, of which I
drank very heartily, and found myself well refreshed.

About noon, I saw coming towards the house a kind of vehicle drawn like a
sledge by four _Yahoos_.  There was in it an old steed, who seemed to be
of quality; he alighted with his hind-feet forward, having by accident
got a hurt in his left fore-foot.  He came to dine with our horse, who
received him with great civility.  They dined in the best room, and had
oats boiled in milk for the second course, which the old horse ate warm,
but the rest cold.  Their mangers were placed circular in the middle of
the room, and divided into several partitions, round which they sat on
their haunches, upon bosses of straw.  In the middle was a large rack,
with angles answering to every partition of the manger; so that each
horse and mare ate their own hay, and their own mash of oats and milk,
with much decency and regularity.  The behaviour of the young colt and
foal appeared very modest, and that of the master and mistress extremely
cheerful and complaisant to their guest.  The gray ordered me to stand by
him; and much discourse passed between him and his friend concerning me,
as I found by the stranger’s often looking on me, and the frequent
repetition of the word _Yahoo_.

I happened to wear my gloves, which the master gray observing, seemed
perplexed, discovering signs of wonder what I had done to my fore-feet.
He put his hoof three or four times to them, as if he would signify, that
I should reduce them to their former shape, which I presently did,
pulling off both my gloves, and putting them into my pocket.  This
occasioned farther talk; and I saw the company was pleased with my
behaviour, whereof I soon found the good effects.  I was ordered to speak
the few words I understood; and while they were at dinner, the master
taught me the names for oats, milk, fire, water, and some others, which I
could readily pronounce after him, having from my youth a great facility
in learning languages.

When dinner was done, the master horse took me aside, and by signs and
words made me understand the concern he was in that I had nothing to eat.
Oats in their tongue are called _hlunnh_.  This word I pronounced two or
three times; for although I had refused them at first, yet, upon second
thoughts, I considered that I could contrive to make of them a kind of
bread, which might be sufficient, with milk, to keep me alive, till I
could make my escape to some other country, and to creatures of my own
species.  The horse immediately ordered a white mare servant of his
family to bring me a good quantity of oats in a sort of wooden tray.
These I heated before the fire, as well as I could, and rubbed them till
the husks came off, which I made a shift to winnow from the grain.  I
ground and beat them between two stones; then took water, and made them
into a paste or cake, which I toasted at the fire and eat warm with milk.
It was at first a very insipid diet, though common enough in many parts
of Europe, but grew tolerable by time; and having been often reduced to
hard fare in my life, this was not the first experiment I had made how
easily nature is satisfied.  And I cannot but observe, that I never had
one hours sickness while I stayed in this island.  It is true, I
sometimes made a shift to catch a rabbit, or bird, by springs made of
_Yahoo’s_ hairs; and I often gathered wholesome herbs, which I boiled,
and ate as salads with my bread; and now and then, for a rarity, I made a
little butter, and drank the whey.  I was at first at a great loss for
salt, but custom soon reconciled me to the want of it; and I am confident
that the frequent use of salt among us is an effect of luxury, and was
first introduced only as a provocative to drink, except where it is
necessary for preserving flesh in long voyages, or in places remote from
great markets; for we observe no animal to be fond of it but man, and as
to myself, when I left this country, it was a great while before I could
endure the taste of it in anything that I ate.

This is enough to say upon the subject of my diet, wherewith other
travellers fill their books, as if the readers were personally concerned
whether we fare well or ill.  However, it was necessary to mention this
matter, lest the world should think it impossible that I could find
sustenance for three years in such a country, and among such inhabitants.

When it grew towards evening, the master horse ordered a place for me to
lodge in; it was but six yards from the house and separated from the
stable of the _Yahoos_.  Here I got some straw, and covering myself with
my own clothes, slept very sound.  But I was in a short time better
accommodated, as the reader shall know hereafter, when I come to treat
more particularly about my way of living.



CHAPTER III.


The author studies to learn the language.  The Houyhnhnm, his master,
assists in teaching him.  The language described.  Several Houyhnhnms of
quality come out of curiosity to see the author.  He gives his master a
short account of his voyage.

My principal endeavour was to learn the language, which my master (for so
I shall henceforth call him), and his children, and every servant of his
house, were desirous to teach me; for they looked upon it as a prodigy,
that a brute animal should discover such marks of a rational creature.  I
pointed to every thing, and inquired the name of it, which I wrote down
in my journal-book when I was alone, and corrected my bad accent by
desiring those of the family to pronounce it often.  In this employment,
a sorrel nag, one of the under-servants, was very ready to assist me.

In speaking, they pronounced through the nose and throat, and their
language approaches nearest to the High-Dutch, or German, of any I know
in Europe; but is much more graceful and significant.  The emperor
Charles V. made almost the same observation, when he said “that if he
were to speak to his horse, it should be in High-Dutch.”

The curiosity and impatience of my master were so great, that he spent
many hours of his leisure to instruct me.  He was convinced (as he
afterwards told me) that I must be a _Yahoo_; but my teachableness,
civility, and cleanliness, astonished him; which were qualities
altogether opposite to those animals.  He was most perplexed about my
clothes, reasoning sometimes with himself, whether they were a part of my
body: for I never pulled them off till the family were asleep, and got
them on before they waked in the morning.  My master was eager to learn
“whence I came; how I acquired those appearances of reason, which I
discovered in all my actions; and to know my story from my own mouth,
which he hoped he should soon do by the great proficiency I made in
learning and pronouncing their words and sentences.”  To help my memory,
I formed all I learned into the English alphabet, and writ the words
down, with the translations.  This last, after some time, I ventured to
do in my master’s presence.  It cost me much trouble to explain to him
what I was doing; for the inhabitants have not the least idea of books or
literature.

In about ten weeks time, I was able to understand most of his questions;
and in three months, could give him some tolerable answers.  He was
extremely curious to know “from what part of the country I came, and how
I was taught to imitate a rational creature; because the _Yahoos_ (whom
he saw I exactly resembled in my head, hands, and face, that were only
visible), with some appearance of cunning, and the strongest disposition
to mischief, were observed to be the most unteachable of all brutes.”  I
answered, “that I came over the sea, from a far place, with many others
of my own kind, in a great hollow vessel made of the bodies of trees:
that my companions forced me to land on this coast, and then left me to
shift for myself.”  It was with some difficulty, and by the help of many
signs, that I brought him to understand me.  He replied, “that I must
needs be mistaken, or that I said the thing which was not;” for they have
no word in their language to express lying or falsehood.  “He knew it was
impossible that there could be a country beyond the sea, or that a parcel
of brutes could move a wooden vessel whither they pleased upon water.  He
was sure no _Houyhnhnm_ alive could make such a vessel, nor would trust
_Yahoos_ to manage it.”

The word _Houyhnhnm_, in their tongue, signifies a _horse_, and, in its
etymology, the _perfection of nature_.  I told my master, “that I was at
a loss for expression, but would improve as fast as I could; and hoped,
in a short time, I should be able to tell him wonders.”  He was pleased
to direct his own mare, his colt, and foal, and the servants of the
family, to take all opportunities of instructing me; and every day, for
two or three hours, he was at the same pains himself.  Several horses and
mares of quality in the neighbourhood came often to our house, upon the
report spread of “a wonderful _Yahoo_, that could speak like a
_Houyhnhnm_, and seemed, in his words and actions, to discover some
glimmerings of reason.”  These delighted to converse with me: they put
many questions, and received such answers as I was able to return.  By
all these advantages I made so great a progress, that, in five months
from my arrival I understood whatever was spoken, and could express
myself tolerably well.

The _Houyhnhnms_, who came to visit my master out of a design of seeing
and talking with me, could hardly believe me to be a right _Yahoo_,
because my body had a different covering from others of my kind.  They
were astonished to observe me without the usual hair or skin, except on
my head, face, and hands; but I discovered that secret to my master upon
an accident which happened about a fortnight before.

I have already told the reader, that every night, when the family were
gone to bed, it was my custom to strip, and cover myself with my clothes.
It happened, one morning early, that my master sent for me by the sorrel
nag, who was his valet.  When he came I was fast asleep, my clothes
fallen off on one side, and my shirt above my waist.  I awaked at the
noise he made, and observed him to deliver his message in some disorder;
after which he went to my master, and in a great fright gave him a very
confused account of what he had seen.  This I presently discovered, for,
going as soon as I was dressed to pay my attendance upon his honour, he
asked me “the meaning of what his servant had reported, that I was not
the same thing when I slept, as I appeared to be at other times; that his
vale assured him, some part of me was white, some yellow, at least not so
white, and some brown.”

I had hitherto concealed the secret of my dress, in order to distinguish
myself, as much as possible, from that cursed race of _Yahoos_; but now I
found it in vain to do so any longer.  Besides, I considered that my
clothes and shoes would soon wear out, which already were in a declining
condition, and must be supplied by some contrivance from the hides of
_Yahoos_, or other brutes; whereby the whole secret would be known.  I
therefore told my master, “that in the country whence I came, those of my
kind always covered their bodies with the hairs of certain animals
prepared by art, as well for decency as to avoid the inclemencies of air,
both hot and cold; of which, as to my own person, I would give him
immediate conviction, if he pleased to command me: only desiring his
excuse, if I did not expose those parts that nature taught us to
conceal.”  He said, “my discourse was all very strange, but especially
the last part; for he could not understand, why nature should teach us to
conceal what nature had given; that neither himself nor family were
ashamed of any parts of their bodies; but, however, I might do as I
pleased.”  Whereupon I first unbuttoned my coat, and pulled it off.  I
did the same with my waistcoat.  I drew off my shoes, stockings, and
breeches.  I let my shirt down to my waist, and drew up the bottom;
fastening it like a girdle about my middle, to hide my nakedness.

My master observed the whole performance with great signs of curiosity
and admiration.  He took up all my clothes in his pastern, one piece
after another, and examined them diligently; he then stroked my body very
gently, and looked round me several times; after which, he said, it was
plain I must be a perfect _Yahoo_; but that I differed very much from the
rest of my species in the softness, whiteness, and smoothness of my skin;
my want of hair in several parts of my body; the shape and shortness of
my claws behind and before; and my affectation of walking continually on
my two hinder feet.  He desired to see no more; and gave me leave to put
on my clothes again, for I was shuddering with cold.

I expressed my uneasiness at his giving me so often the appellation of
_Yahoo_, an odious animal, for which I had so utter a hatred and
contempt: I begged he would forbear applying that word to me, and make
the same order in his family and among his friends whom he suffered to
see me.  I requested likewise, “that the secret of my having a false
covering to my body, might be known to none but himself, at least as long
as my present clothing should last; for as to what the sorrel nag, his
valet, had observed, his honour might command him to conceal it.”

All this my master very graciously consented to; and thus the secret was
kept till my clothes began to wear out, which I was forced to supply by
several contrivances that shall hereafter be mentioned.  In the meantime,
he desired “I would go on with my utmost diligence to learn their
language, because he was more astonished at my capacity for speech and
reason, than at the figure of my body, whether it were covered or not;”
adding, “that he waited with some impatience to hear the wonders which I
promised to tell him.”

Thenceforward he doubled the pains he had been at to instruct me: he
brought me into all company, and made them treat me with civility;
“because,” as he told them, privately, “this would put me into good
humour, and make me more diverting.”

Every day, when I waited on him, beside the trouble he was at in
teaching, he would ask me several questions concerning myself, which I
answered as well as I could, and by these means he had already received
some general ideas, though very imperfect.  It would be tedious to relate
the several steps by which I advanced to a more regular conversation; but
the first account I gave of myself in any order and length was to this
purpose:

“That I came from a very far country, as I already had attempted to tell
him, with about fifty more of my own species; that we travelled upon the
seas in a great hollow vessel made of wood, and larger than his honour’s
house.  I described the ship to him in the best terms I could, and
explained, by the help of my handkerchief displayed, how it was driven
forward by the wind.  That upon a quarrel among us, I was set on shore on
this coast, where I walked forward, without knowing whither, till he
delivered me from the persecution of those execrable _Yahoos_.”  He asked
me, “who made the ship, and how it was possible that the _Houyhnhnms_ of
my country would leave it to the management of brutes?”  My answer was,
“that I durst proceed no further in my relation, unless he would give me
his word and honour that he would not be offended, and then I would tell
him the wonders I had so often promised.”  He agreed; and I went on by
assuring him, that the ship was made by creatures like myself; who, in
all the countries I had travelled, as well as in my own, were the only
governing rational animals; and that upon my arrival hither, I was as
much astonished to see the _Houyhnhnms_ act like rational beings, as he,
or his friends, could be, in finding some marks of reason in a creature
he was pleased to call a _Yahoo_; to which I owned my resemblance in
every part, but could not account for their degenerate and brutal nature.
I said farther, “that if good fortune ever restored me to my native
country, to relate my travels hither, as I resolved to do, everybody
would believe, that I said the thing that was not, that I invented the
story out of my own head; and (with all possible respect to himself, his
family, and friends, and under his promise of not being offended) our
countrymen would hardly think it probable that a _Houyhnhnm_ should be
the presiding creature of a nation, and a _Yahoo_ the brute.”



CHAPTER IV.


The Houyhnhnm’s notion of truth and falsehood.  The author’s discourse
disapproved by his master.  The author gives a more particular account of
himself, and the accidents of his voyage.

My master heard me with great appearances of uneasiness in his
countenance; because doubting, or not believing, are so little known in
this country, that the inhabitants cannot tell how to behave themselves
under such circumstances.  And I remember, in frequent discourses with my
master concerning the nature of manhood in other parts of the world,
having occasion to talk of lying and false representation, it was with
much difficulty that he comprehended what I meant, although he had
otherwise a most acute judgment.  For he argued thus: “that the use of
speech was to make us understand one another, and to receive information
of facts; now, if any one said the thing which was not, these ends were
defeated, because I cannot properly be said to understand him; and I am
so far from receiving information, that he leaves me worse than in
ignorance; for I am led to believe a thing black, when it is white, and
short, when it is long.”  And these were all the notions he had
concerning that faculty of lying, so perfectly well understood, and so
universally practised, among human creatures.

To return from this digression.  When I asserted that the _Yahoos_ were
the only governing animals in my country, which my master said was
altogether past his conception, he desired to know, “whether we had
_Houyhnhnms_ among us, and what was their employment?”  I told him, “we
had great numbers; that in summer they grazed in the fields, and in
winter were kept in houses with hay and oats, where _Yahoo_ servants were
employed to rub their skins smooth, comb their manes, pick their feet,
serve them with food, and make their beds.”  “I understand you well,”
said my master: “it is now very plain, from all you have spoken, that
whatever share of reason the _Yahoos_ pretend to, the _Houyhnhnms_ are
your masters; I heartily wish our _Yahoos_ would be so tractable.”  I
begged “his honour would please to excuse me from proceeding any further,
because I was very certain that the account he expected from me would be
highly displeasing.”  But he insisted in commanding me to let him know
the best and the worst.  I told him “he should be obeyed.”  I owned “that
the _Houyhnhnms_ among us, whom we called horses, were the most generous
and comely animals we had; that they excelled in strength and swiftness;
and when they belonged to persons of quality, were employed in
travelling, racing, or drawing chariots; they were treated with much
kindness and care, till they fell into diseases, or became foundered in
the feet; but then they were sold, and used to all kind of drudgery till
they died; after which their skins were stripped, and sold for what they
were worth, and their bodies left to be devoured by dogs and birds of
prey.  But the common race of horses had not so good fortune, being kept
by farmers and carriers, and other mean people, who put them to greater
labour, and fed them worse.”  I described, as well as I could, our way of
riding; the shape and use of a bridle, a saddle, a spur, and a whip; of
harness and wheels.  I added, “that we fastened plates of a certain hard
substance, called iron, at the bottom of their feet, to preserve their
hoofs from being broken by the stony ways, on which we often travelled.”

My master, after some expressions of great indignation, wondered “how we
dared to venture upon a _Houyhnhnm’s_ back; for he was sure, that the
weakest servant in his house would be able to shake off the strongest
_Yahoo_; or by lying down and rolling on his back, squeeze the brute to
death.”  I answered “that our horses were trained up, from three or four
years old, to the several uses we intended them for; that if any of them
proved intolerably vicious, they were employed for carriages; that they
were severely beaten, while they were young, for any mischievous tricks;
that the males, designed for the common use of riding or draught, were
generally castrated about two years after their birth, to take down their
spirits, and make them more tame and gentle; that they were indeed
sensible of rewards and punishments; but his honour would please to
consider, that they had not the least tincture of reason, any more than
the _Yahoos_ in this country.”

It put me to the pains of many circumlocutions, to give my master a right
idea of what I spoke; for their language does not abound in variety of
words, because their wants and passions are fewer than among us.  But it
is impossible to express his noble resentment at our savage treatment of
the _Houyhnhnm_ race; particularly after I had explained the manner and
use of castrating horses among us, to hinder them from propagating their
kind, and to render them more servile.  He said, “if it were possible
there could be any country where _Yahoos_ alone were endued with reason,
they certainly must be the governing animal; because reason in time will
always prevail against brutal strength.  But, considering the frame of
our bodies, and especially of mine, he thought no creature of equal bulk
was so ill-contrived for employing that reason in the common offices of
life;” whereupon he desired to know “whether those among whom I lived
resembled me, or the _Yahoos_ of his country?”  I assured him, “that I
was as well shaped as most of my age; but the younger, and the females,
were much more soft and tender, and the skins of the latter generally as
white as milk.”  He said, “I differed indeed from other _Yahoos_, being
much more cleanly, and not altogether so deformed; but, in point of real
advantage, he thought I differed for the worse: that my nails were of no
use either to my fore or hinder feet; as to my fore feet, he could not
properly call them by that name, for he never observed me to walk upon
them; that they were too soft to bear the ground; that I generally went
with them uncovered; neither was the covering I sometimes wore on them of
the same shape, or so strong as that on my feet behind: that I could not
walk with any security, for if either of my hinder feet slipped, I must
inevitably fail.”  He then began to find fault with other parts of my
body: “the flatness of my face, the prominence of my nose, mine eyes
placed directly in front, so that I could not look on either side without
turning my head: that I was not able to feed myself, without lifting one
of my fore-feet to my mouth: and therefore nature had placed those joints
to answer that necessity.  He knew not what could be the use of those
several clefts and divisions in my feet behind; that these were too soft
to bear the hardness and sharpness of stones, without a covering made
from the skin of some other brute; that my whole body wanted a fence
against heat and cold, which I was forced to put on and off every day,
with tediousness and trouble: and lastly, that he observed every animal
in this country naturally to abhor the _Yahoos_, whom the weaker avoided,
and the stronger drove from them.  So that, supposing us to have the gift
of reason, he could not see how it were possible to cure that natural
antipathy, which every creature discovered against us; nor consequently
how we could tame and render them serviceable.  However, he would,” as he
said, “debate the matter no farther, because he was more desirous to know
my own story, the country where I was born, and the several actions and
events of my life, before I came hither.”

I assured him, “how extremely desirous I was that he should be satisfied
on every point; but I doubted much, whether it would be possible for me
to explain myself on several subjects, whereof his honour could have no
conception; because I saw nothing in his country to which I could
resemble them; that, however, I would do my best, and strive to express
myself by similitudes, humbly desiring his assistance when I wanted
proper words;” which he was pleased to promise me.

I said, “my birth was of honest parents, in an island called England;
which was remote from his country, as many days’ journey as the strongest
of his honour’s servants could travel in the annual course of the sun;
that I was bred a surgeon, whose trade it is to cure wounds and hurts in
the body, gotten by accident or violence; that my country was governed by
a female man, whom we called queen; that I left it to get riches, whereby
I might maintain myself and family, when I should return; that, in my
last voyage, I was commander of the ship, and had about fifty _Yahoos_
under me, many of which died at sea, and I was forced to supply them by
others picked out from several nations; that our ship was twice in danger
of being sunk, the first time by a great storm, and the second by
striking against a rock.”  Here my master interposed, by asking me, “how
I could persuade strangers, out of different countries, to venture with
me, after the losses I had sustained, and the hazards I had run?”  I
said, “they were fellows of desperate fortunes, forced to fly from the
places of their birth on account of their poverty or their crimes.  Some
were undone by lawsuits; others spent all they had in drinking, whoring,
and gaming; others fled for treason; many for murder, theft, poisoning,
robbery, perjury, forgery, coining false money, for committing rapes, or
sodomy; for flying from their colours, or deserting to the enemy; and
most of them had broken prison; none of these durst return to their
native countries, for fear of being hanged, or of starving in a jail; and
therefore they were under the necessity of seeking a livelihood in other
places.”

During this discourse, my master was pleased to interrupt me several
times.  I had made use of many circumlocutions in describing to him the
nature of the several crimes for which most of our crew had been forced
to fly their country.  This labour took up several days’ conversation,
before he was able to comprehend me.  He was wholly at a loss to know
what could be the use or necessity of practising those vices.  To clear
up which, I endeavoured to give some ideas of the desire of power and
riches; of the terrible effects of lust, intemperance, malice, and envy.
All this I was forced to define and describe by putting cases and making
suppositions.  After which, like one whose imagination was struck with
something never seen or heard of before, he would lift up his eyes with
amazement and indignation.  Power, government, war, law, punishment, and
a thousand other things, had no terms wherein that language could express
them, which made the difficulty almost insuperable, to give my master any
conception of what I meant.  But being of an excellent understanding,
much improved by contemplation and converse, he at last arrived at a
competent knowledge of what human nature, in our parts of the world, is
capable to perform, and desired I would give him some particular account
of that land which we call Europe, but especially of my own country.



CHAPTER V.


The author at his master’s command, informs him of the state of England.
The causes of war among the princes of Europe.  The author begins to
explain the English constitution.

The reader may please to observe, that the following extract of many
conversations I had with my master, contains a summary of the most
material points which were discoursed at several times for above two
years; his honour often desiring fuller satisfaction, as I farther
improved in the _Houyhnhnm_ tongue.  I laid before him, as well as I
could, the whole state of Europe; I discoursed of trade and manufactures,
of arts and sciences; and the answers I gave to all the questions he
made, as they arose upon several subjects, were a fund of conversation
not to be exhausted.  But I shall here only set down the substance of
what passed between us concerning my own country, reducing it in order as
well as I can, without any regard to time or other circumstances, while I
strictly adhere to truth.  My only concern is, that I shall hardly be
able to do justice to my master’s arguments and expressions, which must
needs suffer by my want of capacity, as well as by a translation into our
barbarous English.

In obedience, therefore, to his honour’s commands, I related to him the
Revolution under the Prince of Orange; the long war with France, entered
into by the said prince, and renewed by his successor, the present queen,
wherein the greatest powers of Christendom were engaged, and which still
continued: I computed, at his request, “that about a million of _Yahoos_
might have been killed in the whole progress of it; and perhaps a hundred
or more cities taken, and five times as many ships burnt or sunk.”

He asked me, “what were the usual causes or motives that made one country
go to war with another?”  I answered “they were innumerable; but I should
only mention a few of the chief.  Sometimes the ambition of princes, who
never think they have land or people enough to govern; sometimes the
corruption of ministers, who engage their master in a war, in order to
stifle or divert the clamour of the subjects against their evil
administration.  Difference in opinions has cost many millions of lives:
for instance, whether flesh be bread, or bread be flesh; whether the
juice of a certain berry be blood or wine; whether whistling be a vice or
a virtue; whether it be better to kiss a post, or throw it into the fire;
what is the best colour for a coat, whether black, white, red, or gray;
and whether it should be long or short, narrow or wide, dirty or clean;
with many more.  Neither are any wars so furious and bloody, or of so
long a continuance, as those occasioned by difference in opinion,
especially if it be in things indifferent.

“Sometimes the quarrel between two princes is to decide which of them
shall dispossess a third of his dominions, where neither of them pretend
to any right.  Sometimes one prince quarrels with another for fear the
other should quarrel with him.  Sometimes a war is entered upon, because
the enemy is too strong; and sometimes, because he is too weak.
Sometimes our neighbours want the things which we have, or have the
things which we want, and we both fight, till they take ours, or give us
theirs.  It is a very justifiable cause of a war, to invade a country
after the people have been wasted by famine, destroyed by pestilence, or
embroiled by factions among themselves.  It is justifiable to enter into
war against our nearest ally, when one of his towns lies convenient for
us, or a territory of land, that would render our dominions round and
complete.  If a prince sends forces into a nation, where the people are
poor and ignorant, he may lawfully put half of them to death, and make
slaves of the rest, in order to civilize and reduce them from their
barbarous way of living.  It is a very kingly, honourable, and frequent
practice, when one prince desires the assistance of another, to secure
him against an invasion, that the assistant, when he has driven out the
invader, should seize on the dominions himself, and kill, imprison, or
banish, the prince he came to relieve.  Alliance by blood, or marriage,
is a frequent cause of war between princes; and the nearer the kindred
is, the greater their disposition to quarrel; poor nations are hungry,
and rich nations are proud; and pride and hunger will ever be at
variance.  For these reasons, the trade of a soldier is held the most
honourable of all others; because a soldier is a _Yahoo_ hired to kill,
in cold blood, as many of his own species, who have never offended him,
as possibly he can.

“There is likewise a kind of beggarly princes in Europe, not able to make
war by themselves, who hire out their troops to richer nations, for so
much a day to each man; of which they keep three-fourths to themselves,
and it is the best part of their maintenance: such are those in many
northern parts of Europe.”

“What you have told me,” said my master, “upon the subject of war, does
indeed discover most admirably the effects of that reason you pretend to:
however, it is happy that the shame is greater than the danger; and that
nature has left you utterly incapable of doing much mischief.  For, your
mouths lying flat with your faces, you can hardly bite each other to any
purpose, unless by consent.  Then as to the claws upon your feet before
and behind, they are so short and tender, that one of our _Yahoos_ would
drive a dozen of yours before him.  And therefore, in recounting the
numbers of those who have been killed in battle, I cannot but think you
have said the thing which is not.”

I could not forbear shaking my head, and smiling a little at his
ignorance.  And being no stranger to the art of war, I gave him a
description of cannons, culverins, muskets, carabines, pistols, bullets,
powder, swords, bayonets, battles, sieges, retreats, attacks, undermines,
countermines, bombardments, sea fights, ships sunk with a thousand men,
twenty thousand killed on each side, dying groans, limbs flying in the
air, smoke, noise, confusion, trampling to death under horses’ feet,
flight, pursuit, victory; fields strewed with carcases, left for food to
dogs and wolves and birds of prey; plundering, stripping, ravishing,
burning, and destroying.  And to set forth the valour of my own dear
countrymen, I assured him, “that I had seen them blow up a hundred
enemies at once in a siege, and as many in a ship, and beheld the dead
bodies drop down in pieces from the clouds, to the great diversion of the
spectators.”

I was going on to more particulars, when my master commanded me silence.
He said, “whoever understood the nature of _Yahoos_, might easily believe
it possible for so vile an animal to be capable of every action I had
named, if their strength and cunning equalled their malice.  But as my
discourse had increased his abhorrence of the whole species, so he found
it gave him a disturbance in his mind to which he was wholly a stranger
before.  He thought his ears, being used to such abominable words, might,
by degrees, admit them with less detestation: that although he hated the
_Yahoos_ of this country, yet he no more blamed them for their odious
qualities, than he did a _gnnayh_ (a bird of prey) for its cruelty, or a
sharp stone for cutting his hoof.  But when a creature pretending to
reason could be capable of such enormities, he dreaded lest the
corruption of that faculty might be worse than brutality itself.  He
seemed therefore confident, that, instead of reason we were only
possessed of some quality fitted to increase our natural vices; as the
reflection from a troubled stream returns the image of an ill shapen
body, not only larger but more distorted.”

He added, “that he had heard too much upon the subject of war, both in
this and some former discourses.  There was another point, which a little
perplexed him at present.  I had informed him, that some of our crew left
their country on account of being ruined by law; that I had already
explained the meaning of the word; but he was at a loss how it should
come to pass, that the law, which was intended for every man’s
preservation, should be any man’s ruin.  Therefore he desired to be
further satisfied what I meant by law, and the dispensers thereof,
according to the present practice in my own country; because he thought
nature and reason were sufficient guides for a reasonable animal, as we
pretended to be, in showing us what he ought to do, and what to avoid.”

I assured his honour, “that the law was a science in which I had not much
conversed, further than by employing advocates, in vain, upon some
injustices that had been done me: however, I would give him all the
satisfaction I was able.”

I said, “there was a society of men among us, bred up from their youth in
the art of proving, by words multiplied for the purpose, that white is
black, and black is white, according as they are paid.  To this society
all the rest of the people are slaves.  For example, if my neighbour has
a mind to my cow, he has a lawyer to prove that he ought to have my cow
from me.  I must then hire another to defend my right, it being against
all rules of law that any man should be allowed to speak for himself.
Now, in this case, I, who am the right owner, lie under two great
disadvantages: first, my lawyer, being practised almost from his cradle
in defending falsehood, is quite out of his element when he would be an
advocate for justice, which is an unnatural office he always attempts
with great awkwardness, if not with ill-will.  The second disadvantage
is, that my lawyer must proceed with great caution, or else he will be
reprimanded by the judges, and abhorred by his brethren, as one that
would lessen the practice of the law.  And therefore I have but two
methods to preserve my cow.  The first is, to gain over my adversary’s
lawyer with a double fee, who will then betray his client by insinuating
that he hath justice on his side.  The second way is for my lawyer to
make my cause appear as unjust as he can, by allowing the cow to belong
to my adversary: and this, if it be skilfully done, will certainly
bespeak the favour of the bench.  Now your honour is to know, that these
judges are persons appointed to decide all controversies of property, as
well as for the trial of criminals, and picked out from the most
dexterous lawyers, who are grown old or lazy; and having been biassed all
their lives against truth and equity, lie under such a fatal necessity of
favouring fraud, perjury, and oppression, that I have known some of them
refuse a large bribe from the side where justice lay, rather than injure
the faculty, by doing any thing unbecoming their nature or their office.

“It is a maxim among these lawyers that whatever has been done before,
may legally be done again: and therefore they take special care to record
all the decisions formerly made against common justice, and the general
reason of mankind.  These, under the name of precedents, they produce as
authorities to justify the most iniquitous opinions; and the judges never
fail of directing accordingly.

“In pleading, they studiously avoid entering into the merits of the
cause; but are loud, violent, and tedious, in dwelling upon all
circumstances which are not to the purpose.  For instance, in the case
already mentioned; they never desire to know what claim or title my
adversary has to my cow; but whether the said cow were red or black; her
horns long or short; whether the field I graze her in be round or square;
whether she was milked at home or abroad; what diseases she is subject
to, and the like; after which they consult precedents, adjourn the cause
from time to time, and in ten, twenty, or thirty years, come to an issue.

“It is likewise to be observed, that this society has a peculiar cant and
jargon of their own, that no other mortal can understand, and wherein all
their laws are written, which they take special care to multiply; whereby
they have wholly confounded the very essence of truth and falsehood, of
right and wrong; so that it will take thirty years to decide, whether the
field left me by my ancestors for six generations belongs to me, or to a
stranger three hundred miles off.

“In the trial of persons accused for crimes against the state, the method
is much more short and commendable: the judge first sends to sound the
disposition of those in power, after which he can easily hang or save a
criminal, strictly preserving all due forms of law.”

Here my master interposing, said, “it was a pity, that creatures endowed
with such prodigious abilities of mind, as these lawyers, by the
description I gave of them, must certainly be, were not rather encouraged
to be instructors of others in wisdom and knowledge.”  In answer to which
I assured his honour, “that in all points out of their own trade, they
were usually the most ignorant and stupid generation among us, the most
despicable in common conversation, avowed enemies to all knowledge and
learning, and equally disposed to pervert the general reason of mankind
in every other subject of discourse as in that of their own profession.”



CHAPTER VI.


A continuation of the state of England under Queen Anne.  The character
of a first minister of state in European courts.

My master was yet wholly at a loss to understand what motives could
incite this race of lawyers to perplex, disquiet, and weary themselves,
and engage in a confederacy of injustice, merely for the sake of injuring
their fellow-animals; neither could he comprehend what I meant in saying,
they did it for hire.  Whereupon I was at much pains to describe to him
the use of money, the materials it was made of, and the value of the
metals; “that when a _Yahoo_ had got a great store of this precious
substance, he was able to purchase whatever he had a mind to; the finest
clothing, the noblest houses, great tracts of land, the most costly meats
and drinks, and have his choice of the most beautiful females.  Therefore
since money alone was able to perform all these feats, our _Yahoos_
thought they could never have enough of it to spend, or to save, as they
found themselves inclined, from their natural bent either to profusion or
avarice; that the rich man enjoyed the fruit of the poor man’s labour,
and the latter were a thousand to one in proportion to the former; that
the bulk of our people were forced to live miserably, by labouring every
day for small wages, to make a few live plentifully.”

I enlarged myself much on these, and many other particulars to the same
purpose; but his honour was still to seek; for he went upon a
supposition, that all animals had a title to their share in the
productions of the earth, and especially those who presided over the
rest.  Therefore he desired I would let him know, “what these costly
meats were, and how any of us happened to want them?”  Whereupon I
enumerated as many sorts as came into my head, with the various methods
of dressing them, which could not be done without sending vessels by sea
to every part of the world, as well for liquors to drink as for sauces
and innumerable other conveniences.  I assured him “that this whole globe
of earth must be at least three times gone round before one of our better
female _Yahoos_ could get her breakfast, or a cup to put it in.”  He said
“that must needs be a miserable country which cannot furnish food for its
own inhabitants.  But what he chiefly wondered at was, how such vast
tracts of ground as I described should be wholly without fresh water, and
the people put to the necessity of sending over the sea for drink.”  I
replied “that England (the dear place of my nativity) was computed to
produce three times the quantity of food more than its inhabitants are
able to consume, as well as liquors extracted from grain, or pressed out
of the fruit of certain trees, which made excellent drink, and the same
proportion in every other convenience of life.  But, in order to feed the
luxury and intemperance of the males, and the vanity of the females, we
sent away the greatest part of our necessary things to other countries,
whence, in return, we brought the materials of diseases, folly, and vice,
to spend among ourselves.  Hence it follows of necessity, that vast
numbers of our people are compelled to seek their livelihood by begging,
robbing, stealing, cheating, pimping, flattering, suborning, forswearing,
forging, gaming, lying, fawning, hectoring, voting, scribbling,
star-gazing, poisoning, whoring, canting, libelling, freethinking, and
the like occupations:” every one of which terms I was at much pains to
make him understand.

“That wine was not imported among us from foreign countries to supply the
want of water or other drinks, but because it was a sort of liquid which
made us merry by putting us out of our senses, diverted all melancholy
thoughts, begat wild extravagant imaginations in the brain, raised our
hopes and banished our fears, suspended every office of reason for a
time, and deprived us of the use of our limbs, till we fell into a
profound sleep; although it must be confessed, that we always awaked sick
and dispirited; and that the use of this liquor filled us with diseases
which made our lives uncomfortable and short.

“But beside all this, the bulk of our people supported themselves by
furnishing the necessities or conveniences of life to the rich and to
each other.  For instance, when I am at home, and dressed as I ought to
be, I carry on my body the workmanship of a hundred tradesmen; the
building and furniture of my house employ as many more, and five times
the number to adorn my wife.”

I was going on to tell him of another sort of people, who get their
livelihood by attending the sick, having, upon some occasions, informed
his honour that many of my crew had died of diseases.  But here it was
with the utmost difficulty that I brought him to apprehend what I meant.
“He could easily conceive, that a _Houyhnhnm_, grew weak and heavy a few
days before his death, or by some accident might hurt a limb; but that
nature, who works all things to perfection, should suffer any pains to
breed in our bodies, he thought impossible, and desired to know the
reason of so unaccountable an evil.”

I told him “we fed on a thousand things which operated contrary to each
other; that we ate when we were not hungry, and drank without the
provocation of thirst; that we sat whole nights drinking strong liquors,
without eating a bit, which disposed us to sloth, inflamed our bodies,
and precipitated or prevented digestion; that prostitute female _Yahoos_
acquired a certain malady, which bred rottenness in the bones of those
who fell into their embraces; that this, and many other diseases, were
propagated from father to son; so that great numbers came into the world
with complicated maladies upon them; that it would be endless to give him
a catalogue of all diseases incident to human bodies, for they would not
be fewer than five or six hundred, spread over every limb and joint—in
short, every part, external and intestine, having diseases appropriated
to itself.  To remedy which, there was a sort of people bred up among us
in the profession, or pretence, of curing the sick.  And because I had
some skill in the faculty, I would, in gratitude to his honour, let him
know the whole mystery and method by which they proceed.

“Their fundamental is, that all diseases arise from repletion; whence
they conclude, that a great evacuation of the body is necessary, either
through the natural passage or upwards at the mouth.  Their next business
is from herbs, minerals, gums, oils, shells, salts, juices, sea-weed,
excrements, barks of trees, serpents, toads, frogs, spiders, dead men’s
flesh and bones, birds, beasts, and fishes, to form a composition, for
smell and taste, the most abominable, nauseous, and detestable, they can
possibly contrive, which the stomach immediately rejects with loathing,
and this they call a vomit; or else, from the same store-house, with some
other poisonous additions, they command us to take in at the orifice
above or below (just as the physician then happens to be disposed) a
medicine equally annoying and disgustful to the bowels; which, relaxing
the belly, drives down all before it; and this they call a purge, or a
clyster.  For nature (as the physicians allege) having intended the
superior anterior orifice only for the intromission of solids and
liquids, and the inferior posterior for ejection, these artists
ingeniously considering that in all diseases nature is forced out of her
seat, therefore, to replace her in it, the body must be treated in a
manner directly contrary, by interchanging the use of each orifice;
forcing solids and liquids in at the anus, and making evacuations at the
mouth.

“But, besides real diseases, we are subject to many that are only
imaginary, for which the physicians have invented imaginary cures; these
have their several names, and so have the drugs that are proper for them;
and with these our female _Yahoos_ are always infested.

“One great excellency in this tribe, is their skill at prognostics,
wherein they seldom fail; their predictions in real diseases, when they
rise to any degree of malignity, generally portending death, which is
always in their power, when recovery is not: and therefore, upon any
unexpected signs of amendment, after they have pronounced their sentence,
rather than be accused as false prophets, they know how to approve their
sagacity to the world, by a seasonable dose.

“They are likewise of special use to husbands and wives who are grown
weary of their mates; to eldest sons, to great ministers of state, and
often to princes.”

I had formerly, upon occasion, discoursed with my master upon the nature
of government in general, and particularly of our own excellent
constitution, deservedly the wonder and envy of the whole world.  But
having here accidentally mentioned a minister of state, he commanded me,
some time after, to inform him, “what species of _Yahoo_ I particularly
meant by that appellation.”

I told him, “that a first or chief minister of state, who was the person
I intended to describe, was the creature wholly exempt from joy and
grief, love and hatred, pity and anger; at least, makes use of no other
passions, but a violent desire of wealth, power, and titles; that he
applies his words to all uses, except to the indication of his mind; that
he never tells a truth but with an intent that you should take it for a
lie; nor a lie, but with a design that you should take it for a truth;
that those he speaks worst of behind their backs are in the surest way of
preferment; and whenever he begins to praise you to others, or to
yourself, you are from that day forlorn.  The worst mark you can receive
is a promise, especially when it is confirmed with an oath; after which,
every wise man retires, and gives over all hopes.

“There are three methods, by which a man may rise to be chief minister.
The first is, by knowing how, with prudence, to dispose of a wife, a
daughter, or a sister; the second, by betraying or undermining his
predecessor; and the third is, by a furious zeal, in public assemblies,
against the corruption’s of the court.  But a wise prince would rather
choose to employ those who practise the last of these methods; because
such zealots prove always the most obsequious and subservient to the will
and passions of their master.  That these ministers, having all
employments at their disposal, preserve themselves in power, by bribing
the majority of a senate or great council; and at last, by an expedient,
called an act of indemnity” (whereof I described the nature to him),
“they secure themselves from after-reckonings, and retire from the public
laden with the spoils of the nation.

“The palace of a chief minister is a seminary to breed up others in his
own trade: the pages, lackeys, and porters, by imitating their master,
become ministers of state in their several districts, and learn to excel
in the three principal ingredients, of insolence, lying, and bribery.
Accordingly, they have a subaltern court paid to them by persons of the
best rank; and sometimes by the force of dexterity and impudence, arrive,
through several gradations, to be successors to their lord.

“He is usually governed by a decayed wench, or favourite footman, who are
the tunnels through which all graces are conveyed, and may properly be
called, in the last resort, the governors of the kingdom.”

One day, in discourse, my master, having heard me mention the nobility of
my country, was pleased to make me a compliment which I could not pretend
to deserve: “that he was sure I must have been born of some noble family,
because I far exceeded in shape, colour, and cleanliness, all the
_Yahoos_ of his nation, although I seemed to fail in strength and
agility, which must be imputed to my different way of living from those
other brutes; and besides I was not only endowed with the faculty of
speech, but likewise with some rudiments of reason, to a degree that,
with all his acquaintance, I passed for a prodigy.”

He made me observe, “that among the _Houyhnhnms_, the white, the sorrel,
and the iron-gray, were not so exactly shaped as the bay, the
dapple-gray, and the black; nor born with equal talents of mind, or a
capacity to improve them; and therefore continued always in the condition
of servants, without ever aspiring to match out of their own race, which
in that country would be reckoned monstrous and unnatural.”

I made his honour my most humble acknowledgments for the good opinion he
was pleased to conceive of me, but assured him at the same time, “that my
birth was of the lower sort, having been born of plain honest parents,
who were just able to give me a tolerable education; that nobility, among
us, was altogether a different thing from the idea he had of it; that our
young noblemen are bred from their childhood in idleness and luxury;
that, as soon as years will permit, they consume their vigour, and
contract odious diseases among lewd females; and when their fortunes are
almost ruined, they marry some woman of mean birth, disagreeable person,
and unsound constitution (merely for the sake of money), whom they hate
and despise.  That the productions of such marriages are generally
scrofulous, rickety, or deformed children; by which means the family
seldom continues above three generations, unless the wife takes care to
provide a healthy father, among her neighbours or domestics, in order to
improve and continue the breed.  That a weak diseased body, a meagre
countenance, and sallow complexion, are the true marks of noble blood;
and a healthy robust appearance is so disgraceful in a man of quality,
that the world concludes his real father to have been a groom or a
coachman.  The imperfections of his mind run parallel with those of his
body, being a composition of spleen, dullness, ignorance, caprice,
sensuality, and pride.

“Without the consent of this illustrious body, no law can be enacted,
repealed, or altered: and these nobles have likewise the decision of all
our possessions, without appeal.” {514}



CHAPTER VII.


The author’s great love of his native country.  His master’s observations
upon the constitution and administration of England, as described by the
author, with parallel cases and comparisons.  His master’s observations
upon human nature.

The reader may be disposed to wonder how I could prevail on myself to
give so free a representation of my own species, among a race of mortals
who are already too apt to conceive the vilest opinion of humankind, from
that entire congruity between me and their _Yahoos_.  But I must freely
confess, that the many virtues of those excellent quadrupeds, placed in
opposite view to human corruptions, had so far opened my eyes and
enlarged my understanding, that I began to view the actions and passions
of man in a very different light, and to think the honour of my own kind
not worth managing; which, besides, it was impossible for me to do,
before a person of so acute a judgment as my master, who daily convinced
me of a thousand faults in myself, whereof I had not the least perception
before, and which, with us, would never be numbered even among human
infirmities.  I had likewise learned, from his example, an utter
detestation of all falsehood or disguise; and truth appeared so amiable
to me, that I determined upon sacrificing every thing to it.

Let me deal so candidly with the reader as to confess that there was yet
a much stronger motive for the freedom I took in my representation of
things.  I had not yet been a year in this country before I contracted
such a love and veneration for the inhabitants, that I entered on a firm
resolution never to return to humankind, but to pass the rest of my life
among these admirable _Houyhnhnms_, in the contemplation and practice of
every virtue, where I could have no example or incitement to vice.  But
it was decreed by fortune, my perpetual enemy, that so great a felicity
should not fall to my share.  However, it is now some comfort to reflect,
that in what I said of my countrymen, I extenuated their faults as much
as I durst before so strict an examiner; and upon every article gave as
favourable a turn as the matter would bear.  For, indeed, who is there
alive that will not be swayed by his bias and partiality to the place of
his birth?

