roar of busy life slowly gathered and swelled, until the seething whirl
of the city seemed a strange thing in a sleepy land.

Once, they say, even Atlanta slept dull and drowsy at the foot-hills of
the Alleghanies, until the iron baptism of war awakened her with its
sullen waters, aroused and maddened her, and left her listening to the
sea.  And the sea cried to the hills and the hills answered the sea,
till the city rose like a widow and cast away her weeds, and toiled for
her daily bread; toiled steadily, toiled cunningly,--perhaps with some
bitterness, with a touch, of reclame,--and yet with real earnestness,
and real sweat.

It is a hard thing to live haunted by the ghost of an untrue dream; to
see the wide vision of empire fade into real ashes and dirt; to feel
the pang of the conquered, and yet know that with all the Bad that fell
on one black day, something was vanquished that deserved to live,
something killed that in justice had not dared to die; to know that
with the Right that triumphed, triumphed something of Wrong, something
sordid and mean, something less than the broadest and best.  All this
is bitter hard; and many a man and city and people have found in it
excuse for sulking, and brooding, and listless waiting.

Such are not men of the sturdier make; they of Atlanta turned
resolutely toward the future; and that future held aloft vistas of
purple and gold:--Atlanta, Queen of the cotton kingdom; Atlanta,
Gateway to the Land of the Sun; Atlanta, the new Lachesis, spinner of
web and woof for the world.  So the city crowned her hundred hills with
factories, and stored her shops with cunning handiwork, and stretched
long iron ways to greet the busy Mercury in his coming.  And the Nation
talked of her striving.


Perhaps Atlanta was not christened for the winged maiden of dull
Boeotia; you know the tale,--how swarthy Atalanta, tall and wild, would
marry only him who out-raced her; and how the wily Hippomenes laid
three apples of gold in the way.  She fled like a shadow, paused,
startled over the first apple, but even as he stretched his hand, fled
again; hovered over the second, then, slipping from his hot grasp, flew
over river, vale, and hill; but as she lingered over the third, his
arms fell round her, and looking on each other, the blazing passion of
their love profaned the sanctuary of Love, and they were cursed.  If
Atlanta be not named for Atalanta, she ought to have been.

Atalanta is not the first or the last maiden whom greed of gold has led
to defile the temple of Love; and not maids alone, but men in the race
of life, sink from the high and generous ideals of youth to the
gambler's code of the Bourse; and in all our Nation's striving is not
the Gospel of Work befouled by the Gospel of Pay?  So common is this
that one-half think it normal; so unquestioned, that we almost fear to
question if the end of racing is not gold, if the aim of man is not
rightly to be rich.  And if this is the fault of America, how dire a
danger lies before a new land and a new city, lest Atlanta, stooping
for mere gold, shall find that gold accursed!

It was no maiden's idle whim that started this hard racing; a fearful
wilderness lay about the feet of that city after the War,--feudalism,
poverty, the rise of the Third Estate, serfdom, the re-birth of Law and
Order, and above and between all, the Veil of Race.  How heavy a
journey for weary feet!  what wings must Atalanta have to flit over all
this hollow and hill, through sour wood and sullen water, and by the
red waste of sun-baked clay!  How fleet must Atalanta be if she will
not be tempted by gold to profane the Sanctuary!

The Sanctuary of our fathers has, to be sure, few Gods,--some sneer,
"all too few."  There is the thrifty Mercury of New England, Pluto of
the North, and Ceres of the West; and there, too, is the half-forgotten
Apollo of the South, under whose aegis the maiden ran,--and as she ran
she forgot him, even as there in Boeotia Venus was forgot.  She forgot
the old ideal of the Southern gentleman,--that new-world heir of the
grace and courtliness of patrician, knight, and noble; forgot his honor
with his foibles, his kindliness with his carelessness, and stooped to
apples of gold,--to men busier and sharper, thriftier and more
unscrupulous.  Golden apples are beautiful--I remember the lawless days
of boyhood, when orchards in crimson and gold tempted me over fence and
field--and, too, the merchant who has dethroned the planter is no
despicable parvenu.  Work and wealth are the mighty levers to lift this
old new land; thrift and toil and saving are the highways to new hopes
and new possibilities; and yet the warning is needed lest the wily
Hippomenes tempt Atalanta to thinking that golden apples are the goal
of racing, and not mere incidents by the way.

Atlanta must not lead the South to dream of material prosperity as the
touchstone of all success; already the fatal might of this idea is
beginning to spread; it is replacing the finer type of Southerner with
vulgar money-getters; it is burying the sweeter beauties of Southern
life beneath pretence and ostentation.  For every social ill the
panacea of Wealth has been urged,--wealth to overthrow the remains of
the slave feudalism; wealth to raise the "cracker" Third Estate; wealth
to employ the black serfs, and the prospect of wealth to keep them
working; wealth as the end and aim of politics, and as the legal tender
for law and order; and, finally, instead of Truth, Beauty, and
Goodness, wealth as the ideal of the Public School.

Not only is this true in the world which Atlanta typifies, but it is
threatening to be true of a world beneath and beyond that world,--the
Black World beyond the Veil.  Today it makes little difference to
Atlanta, to the South, what the Negro thinks or dreams or wills.  In
the soul-life of the land he is to-day, and naturally will long remain,
unthought of, half forgotten; and yet when he does come to think and
will and do for himself,--and let no man dream that day will never
come,--then the part he plays will not be one of sudden learning, but
words and thoughts he has been taught to lisp in his race-childhood.
To-day the ferment of his striving toward self-realization is to the
strife of the white world like a wheel within a wheel: beyond the Veil
are smaller but like problems of ideals, of leaders and the led, of
serfdom, of poverty, of order and subordination, and, through all, the
Veil of Race.  Few know of these problems, few who know notice them;
and yet there they are, awaiting student, artist, and seer,--a field
for somebody sometime to discover.  Hither has the temptation of
Hippomenes penetrated; already in this smaller world, which now
indirectly and anon directly must influence the larger for good or ill,
the habit is forming of interpreting the world in dollars.  The old
leaders of Negro opinion, in the little groups where there is a Negro
social consciousness, are being replaced by new; neither the black
preacher nor the black teacher leads as he did two decades ago.  Into
their places are pushing the farmers and gardeners, the well-paid
porters and artisans, the business-men,--all those with property and
money.  And with all this change, so curiously parallel to that of the
Other-world, goes too the same inevitable change in ideals.  The South
laments to-day the slow, steady disappearance of a certain type of
Negro,--the faithful, courteous slave of other days, with his
incorruptible honesty and dignified humility.  He is passing away just
as surely as the old type of Southern gentleman is passing, and from
not dissimilar causes,--the sudden transformation of a fair far-off
ideal of Freedom into the hard reality of bread-winning and the
consequent deification of Bread.

In the Black World, the Preacher and Teacher embodied once the ideals
of this people--the strife for another and a juster world, the vague
dream of righteousness, the mystery of knowing; but to-day the danger
is that these ideals, with their simple beauty and weird inspiration,
will suddenly sink to a question of cash and a lust for gold.  Here
stands this black young Atalanta, girding herself for the race that
must be run; and if her eyes be still toward the hills and sky as in
the days of old, then we may look for noble running; but what if some
ruthless or wily or even thoughtless Hippomenes lay golden apples
before her?  What if the Negro people be wooed from a strife for
righteousness, from a love of knowing, to regard dollars as the be-all
and end-all of life?  What if to the Mammonism of America be added the
rising Mammonism of the re-born South, and the Mammonism of this South
be reinforced by the budding Mammonism of its half-wakened black
millions?  Whither, then, is the new-world quest of Goodness and Beauty
and Truth gone glimmering?  Must this, and that fair flower of Freedom
which, despite the jeers of latter-day striplings, sprung from our
fathers' blood, must that too degenerate into a dusty quest of
gold,--into lawless lust with Hippomenes?


The hundred hills of Atlanta are not all crowned with factories.  On
one, toward the west, the setting sun throws three buildings in bold
relief against the sky.  The beauty of the group lies in its simple
unity:--a broad lawn of green rising from the red street and mingled
roses and peaches; north and south, two plain and stately halls; and in
the midst, half hidden in ivy, a larger building, boldly graceful,
sparingly decorated, and with one low spire.  It is a restful group,
--one never looks for more; it is all here, all intelligible.  There I
live, and there I hear from day to day the low hum of restful life.  In
winter's twilight, when the red sun glows, I can see the dark figures
pass between the halls to the music of the night-bell.  In the morning,
when the sun is golden, the clang of the day-bell brings the hurry and
laughter of three hundred young hearts from hall and street, and from
the busy city below,--children all dark and heavy-haired,--to join
their clear young voices in the music of the morning sacrifice.  In a
half-dozen class-rooms they gather then,--here to follow the love-song
of Dido, here to listen to the tale of Troy divine; there to wander
among the stars, there to wander among men and nations,--and elsewhere
other well-worn ways of knowing this queer world.  Nothing new, no
time-saving devices,--simply old time-glorified methods of delving for
Truth, and searching out the hidden beauties of life, and learning the
good of living.  The riddle of existence is the college curriculum that
was laid before the Pharaohs, that was taught in the groves by Plato,
that formed the trivium and quadrivium, and is to-day laid before the
freedmen's sons by Atlanta University.  And this course of study will
not change; its methods will grow more deft and effectual, its content
richer by toil of scholar and sight of seer; but the true college will
ever have one goal,--not to earn meat, but to know the end and aim of
that life which meat nourishes.

The vision of life that rises before these dark eyes has in it nothing
mean or selfish.  Not at Oxford or at Leipsic, not at Yale or Columbia,
is there an air of higher resolve or more unfettered striving; the
determination to realize for men, both black and white, the broadest
possibilities of life, to seek the better and the best, to spread with
their own hands the Gospel of Sacrifice,--all this is the burden of
their talk and dream.  Here, amid a wide desert of caste and
proscription, amid the heart-hurting slights and jars and vagaries of a
deep race-dislike, lies this green oasis, where hot anger cools, and
the bitterness of disappointment is sweetened by the springs and
breezes of Parnassus; and here men may lie and listen, and learn of a
future fuller than the past, and hear the voice of Time:

  "Entbehren sollst du, sollst entbehren."


They made their mistakes, those who planted Fisk and Howard and Atlanta
before the smoke of battle had lifted; they made their mistakes, but
those mistakes were not the things at which we lately laughed somewhat
uproariously.  They were right when they sought to found a new
educational system upon the University: where, forsooth, shall we
ground knowledge save on the broadest and deepest knowledge?  The roots
of the tree, rather than the leaves, are the sources of its life; and
from the dawn of history, from Academus to Cambridge, the culture of
the University has been the broad foundation-stone on which is built
the kindergarten's A B C.

But these builders did make a mistake in minimizing the gravity of the
problem before them; in thinking it a matter of years and decades; in
therefore building quickly and laying their foundation carelessly, and
lowering the standard of knowing, until they had scattered haphazard
through the South some dozen poorly equipped high schools and miscalled
them universities.  They forgot, too, just as their successors are
forgetting, the rule of inequality:--that of the million black youth,
some were fitted to know and some to dig; that some had the talent and
capacity of university men, and some the talent and capacity of
blacksmiths; and that true training meant neither that all should be
college men nor all artisans, but that the one should be made a
missionary of culture to an untaught people, and the other a free
workman among serfs.  And to seek to make the blacksmith a scholar is
almost as silly as the more modern scheme of making the scholar a
blacksmith; almost, but not quite.


The function of the university is not simply to teach bread-winning, or
to furnish teachers for the public schools or to be a centre of polite
society; it is, above all, to be the organ of that fine adjustment
between real life and the growing knowledge of life, an adjustment
which forms the secret of civilization.  Such an institution the South
of to-day sorely needs.  She has religion, earnest, bigoted:--religion
that on both sides the Veil often omits the sixth, seventh, and eighth
commandments, but substitutes a dozen supplementary ones.  She has, as
Atlanta shows, growing thrift and love of toil; but she lacks that
broad knowledge of what the world knows and knew of human living and
doing, which she may apply to the thousand problems of real life to-day
confronting her.  The need of the South is knowledge and culture,--not
in dainty limited quantity, as before the war, but in broad busy
abundance in the world of work; and until she has this, not all the
Apples of Hesperides, be they golden and bejewelled, can save her from
the curse of the Boeotian lovers.

The Wings of Atalanta are the coming universities of the South.  They
alone can bear the maiden past the temptation of golden fruit.  They
will not guide her flying feet away from the cotton and gold; for--ah,
thoughtful Hippomenes!--do not the apples lie in the very Way of Life?
But they will guide her over and beyond them, and leave her kneeling in
the Sanctuary of Truth and Freedom and broad Humanity, virgin and
undefiled.  Sadly did the Old South err in human education, despising
the education of the masses, and niggardly in the support of colleges.
Her ancient university foundations dwindled and withered under the foul
breath of slavery; and even since the war they have fought a failing
fight for life in the tainted air of social unrest and commercial
selfishness, stunted by the death of criticism, and starving for lack
of broadly cultured men.  And if this is the white South's need and
danger, how much heavier the danger and need of the freedmen's sons!
how pressing here the need of broad ideals and true culture, the
conservation of soul from sordid aims and petty passions!  Let us build
the Southern university--William and Mary, Trinity, Georgia, Texas,
Tulane, Vanderbilt, and the others--fit to live; let us build, too, the
Negro universities:--Fisk, whose foundation was ever broad; Howard, at
the heart of the Nation; Atlanta at Atlanta, whose ideal of scholarship
has been held above the temptation of numbers.  Why not here, and
perhaps elsewhere, plant deeply and for all time centres of learning
and living, colleges that yearly would send into the life of the South
a few white men and a few black men of broad culture, catholic
tolerance, and trained ability, joining their hands to other hands, and
giving to this squabble of the Races a decent and dignified peace?

Patience, Humility, Manners, and Taste, common schools and
kindergartens, industrial and technical schools, literature and
tolerance,--all these spring from knowledge and culture, the children
of the university.  So must men and nations build, not otherwise, not
upside down.

Teach workers to work,--a wise saying; wise when applied to German boys
and American girls; wiser when said of Negro boys, for they have less
knowledge of working and none to teach them.  Teach thinkers to
think,--a needed knowledge in a day of loose and careless logic; and
they whose lot is gravest must have the carefulest training to think
aright.  If these things are so, how foolish to ask what is the best
education for one or seven or sixty million souls! shall we teach them
trades, or train them in liberal arts?  Neither and both: teach the
workers to work and the thinkers to think; make carpenters of
carpenters, and philosophers of philosophers, and fops of fools.  Nor
can we pause here.  We are training not isolated men but a living group
of men,--nay, a group within a group.  And the final product of our
training must be neither a psychologist nor a brickmason, but a man.
And to make men, we must have ideals, broad, pure, and inspiring ends
of living,--not sordid money-getting, not apples of gold.  The worker
must work for the glory of his handiwork, not simply for pay; the
thinker must think for truth, not for fame.  And all this is gained
only by human strife and longing; by ceaseless training and education;
by founding Right on righteousness and Truth on the unhampered search
for Truth; by founding the common school on the university, and the
industrial school on the common school; and weaving thus a system, not
a distortion, and bringing a birth, not an abortion.


When night falls on the City of a Hundred Hills, a wind gathers itself
from the seas and comes murmuring westward.  And at its bidding, the
smoke of the drowsy factories sweeps down upon the mighty city and
covers it like a pall, while yonder at the University the stars twinkle
above Stone Hall.  And they say that yon gray mist is the tunic of
Atalanta pausing over her golden apples.  Fly, my maiden, fly, for
yonder comes Hippomenes!




VI

Of the Training of Black Men

  Why, if the Soul can fling the Dust aside,
  And naked on the Air of Heaven ride,
    Were't not a Shame--were't not a Shame for him
  In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  OMAR KHAYYAM (FITZGERALD).


From the shimmering swirl of waters where many, many thoughts ago the
slave-ship first saw the square tower of Jamestown, have flowed down to
our day three streams of thinking: one swollen from the larger world
here and overseas, saying, the multiplying of human wants in
culture-lands calls for the world-wide cooperation of men in satisfying
them.  Hence arises a new human unity, pulling the ends of earth
nearer, and all men, black, yellow, and white.  The larger humanity
strives to feel in this contact of living Nations and sleeping hordes a
thrill of new life in the world, crying, "If the contact of Life and
Sleep be Death, shame on such Life."  To be sure, behind this thought
lurks the afterthought of force and dominion,--the making of brown men
to delve when the temptation of beads and red calico cloys.

The second thought streaming from the death-ship and the curving river
is the thought of the older South,--the sincere and passionate belief
that somewhere between men and cattle, God created a tertium quid, and
called it a Negro,--a clownish, simple creature, at times even lovable
within its limitations, but straitly foreordained to walk within the
Veil.  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--some of
them with favoring chance might become men, but in sheer self-defence
we dare not let them, and we build about them walls so high, and hang
between them and the light a veil so thick, that they shall not even
think of breaking through.

And last of all there trickles down that third and darker thought,--the
thought of the things themselves, the confused, half-conscious mutter
of men who are black and whitened, crying "Liberty, Freedom,
Opportunity--vouchsafe to us, O boastful World, the chance of living
men!"  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--suppose,
after all, the World is right and we are less than men?  Suppose this
mad impulse within is all wrong, some mock mirage from the untrue?

So here we stand among thoughts of human unity, even through conquest
and slavery; the inferiority of black men, even if forced by fraud; a
shriek in the night for the freedom of men who themselves are not yet
sure of their right to demand it.  This is the tangle of thought and
afterthought wherein we are called to solve the problem of training men
for life.

Behind all its curiousness, so attractive alike to sage and dilettante,
lie its dim dangers, throwing across us shadows at once grotesque and
awful.  Plain it is to us that what the world seeks through desert and
wild we have within our threshold,--a stalwart laboring force, suited
to the semi-tropics; if, deaf to the voice of the Zeitgeist, we refuse
to use and develop these men, we risk poverty and loss.  If, on the
other hand, seized by the brutal afterthought, we debauch the race thus
caught in our talons, selfishly sucking their blood and brains in the
future as in the past, what shall save us from national decadence?
Only that saner selfishness, which Education teaches, can find the
rights of all in the whirl of work.

Again, we may decry the color-prejudice of the South, yet it remains a
heavy fact.  Such curious kinks of the human mind exist and must be
reckoned with soberly.  They cannot be laughed away, nor always
successfully stormed at, nor easily abolished by act of legislature.
And yet they must not be encouraged by being let alone.  They must be
recognized as facts, but unpleasant facts; things that stand in the way
of civilization and religion and common decency.  They can be met in
but one way,--by the breadth and broadening of human reason, by
catholicity of taste and culture.  And so, too, the native ambition and
aspiration of men, even though they be black, backward, and ungraceful,
must not lightly be dealt with.  To stimulate wildly weak and untrained
minds is to play with mighty fires; to flout their striving idly is to
welcome a harvest of brutish crime and shameless lethargy in our very
laps.  The guiding of thought and the deft coordination of deed is at
once the path of honor and humanity.

And so, in this great question of reconciling three vast and partially
contradictory streams of thought, the one panacea of Education leaps to
the lips of all:--such human training as will best use the labor of all
men without enslaving or brutalizing; such training as will give us
poise to encourage the prejudices that bulwark society, and to stamp
out those that in sheer barbarity deafen us to the wail of prisoned
souls within the Veil, and the mounting fury of shackled men.

But when we have vaguely said that Education will set this tangle
straight, what have we uttered but a truism?  Training for life teaches
living; but what training for the profitable living together of black
men and white?  A hundred and fifty years ago our task would have
seemed easier.  Then Dr. Johnson blandly assured us that education was
needful solely for the embellishments of life, and was useless for
ordinary vermin.  To-day we have climbed to heights where we would open
at least the outer courts of knowledge to all, display its treasures to
many, and select the few to whom its mystery of Truth is revealed, not
wholly by birth or the accidents of the stock market, but at least in
part according to deftness and aim, talent and character.  This
programme, however, we are sorely puzzled in carrying out through that
part of the land where the blight of slavery fell hardest, and where we
are dealing with two backward peoples.  To make here in human education
that ever necessary combination of the permanent and the contingent--of
the ideal and the practical in workable equilibrium--has been there, as
it ever must be in every age and place, a matter of infinite experiment
and frequent mistakes.

In rough approximation we may point out four varying decades of work in
Southern education since the Civil War.  From the close of the war
until 1876, was the period of uncertain groping and temporary relief.
There were army schools, mission schools, and schools of the Freedmen's
Bureau in chaotic disarrangement seeking system and co-operation.  Then
followed ten years of constructive definite effort toward the building
of complete school systems in the South.  Normal schools and colleges
were founded for the freedmen, and teachers trained there to man the
public schools.  There was the inevitable tendency of war to
underestimate the prejudices of the master and the ignorance of the
slave, and all seemed clear sailing out of the wreckage of the storm.
Meantime, starting in this decade yet especially developing from 1885
to 1895, began the industrial revolution of the South.  The land saw
glimpses of a new destiny and the stirring of new ideals.  The
educational system striving to complete itself saw new obstacles and a
field of work ever broader and deeper.  The Negro colleges, hurriedly
founded, were inadequately equipped, illogically distributed, and of
varying efficiency and grade; the normal and high schools were doing
little more than common-school work, and the common schools were
training but a third of the children who ought to be in them, and
training these too often poorly.  At the same time the white South, by
reason of its sudden conversion from the slavery ideal, by so much the
more became set and strengthened in its racial prejudice, and
crystallized it into harsh law and harsher custom; while the marvellous
pushing forward of the poor white daily threatened to take even bread
and butter from the mouths of the heavily handicapped sons of the
freedmen.  In the midst, then, of the larger problem of Negro education
sprang up the more practical question of work, the inevitable economic
quandary that faces a people in the transition from slavery to freedom,
and especially those who make that change amid hate and prejudice,
lawlessness and ruthless competition.

The industrial school springing to notice in this decade, but coming to
full recognition in the decade beginning with 1895, was the proffered
answer to this combined educational and economic crisis, and an answer
of singular wisdom and timeliness.  From the very first in nearly all
the schools some attention had been given to training in handiwork, but
now was this training first raised to a dignity that brought it in
direct touch with the South's magnificent industrial development, and
given an emphasis which reminded black folk that before the Temple of
Knowledge swing the Gates of Toil.

Yet after all they are but gates, and when turning our eyes from the
temporary and the contingent in the Negro problem to the broader
question of the permanent uplifting and civilization of black men in
America, we have a right to inquire, as this enthusiasm for material
advancement mounts to its height, if after all the industrial school is
the final and sufficient answer in the training of the Negro race; and
to ask gently, but in all sincerity, the ever-recurring query of the
ages, Is not life more than meat, and the body more than raiment?  And
men ask this to-day all the more eagerly because of sinister signs in
recent educational movements.  The tendency is here, born of slavery
and quickened to renewed life by the crazy imperialism of the day, to
regard human beings as among the material resources of a land to be
trained with an eye single to future dividends.  Race-prejudices, which
keep brown and black men in their "places," we are coming to regard as
useful allies with such a theory, no matter how much they may dull the
ambition and sicken the hearts of struggling human beings.  And above
all, we daily hear that an education that encourages aspiration, that
sets the loftiest of ideals and seeks as an end culture and character
rather than bread-winning, is the privilege of white men and the danger
and delusion of black.

Especially has criticism been directed against the former educational
efforts to aid the Negro.  In the four periods I have mentioned, we
find first, boundless, planless enthusiasm and sacrifice; then the
preparation of teachers for a vast public-school system; then the
launching and expansion of that school system amid increasing
difficulties; and finally the training of workmen for the new and
growing industries.  This development has been sharply ridiculed as a
logical anomaly and flat reversal of nature.  Soothly we have been told
that first industrial and manual training should have taught the Negro
to work, then simple schools should have taught him to read and write,
and finally, after years, high and normal schools could have completed
the system, as intelligence and wealth demanded.

That a system logically so complete was historically impossible, it
needs but a little thought to prove.  Progress in human affairs is more
often a pull than a push, a surging forward of the exceptional man, and
the lifting of his duller brethren slowly and painfully to his
vantage-ground.  Thus it was no accident that gave birth to
universities centuries before the common schools, that made fair
Harvard the first flower of our wilderness.  So in the South: the mass
of the freedmen at the end of the war lacked the intelligence so
necessary to modern workingmen.  They must first have the common school
to teach them to read, write, and cipher; and they must have higher
schools to teach teachers for the common schools.  The white teachers
who flocked South went to establish such a common-school system.  Few
held the idea of founding colleges; most of them at first would have
laughed at the idea.  But they faced, as all men since them have faced,
that central paradox of the South,--the social separation of the races.
At that time it was the sudden volcanic rupture of nearly all relations
between black and white, in work and government and family life.  Since
then a new adjustment of relations in economic and political affairs
has grown up,--an adjustment subtle and difficult to grasp, yet
singularly ingenious, which leaves still that frightful chasm at the
color-line across which men pass at their peril.  Thus, then and now,
there stand in the South two separate worlds; and separate not simply
in the higher realms of social intercourse, but also in church and
school, on railway and street-car, in hotels and theatres, in streets
and city sections, in books and newspapers, in asylums and jails, in
hospitals and graveyards.  There is still enough of contact for large
economic and group cooperation, but the separation is so thorough and
deep that it absolutely precludes for the present between the races
anything like that sympathetic and effective group-training and
leadership of the one by the other, such as the American Negro and all
backward peoples must have for effectual progress.

This the missionaries of '68 soon saw; and if effective industrial and
trade schools were impracticable before the establishment of a
common-school system, just as certainly no adequate common schools
could be founded until there were teachers to teach them.  Southern
whites would not teach them; Northern whites in sufficient numbers
could not be had.  If the Negro was to learn, he must teach himself,
and the most effective help that could be given him was the
establishment of schools to train Negro teachers.  This conclusion was
slowly but surely reached by every student of the situation until
simultaneously, in widely separated regions, without consultation or
systematic plan, there arose a series of institutions designed to
furnish teachers for the untaught.  Above the sneers of critics at the
obvious defects of this procedure must ever stand its one crushing
rejoinder: in a single generation they put thirty thousand black
teachers in the South; they wiped out the illiteracy of the majority of
the black people of the land, and they made Tuskegee possible.

Such higher training-schools tended naturally to deepen broader
development: at first they were common and grammar schools, then some
became high schools.  And finally, by 1900, some thirty-four had one
year or more of studies of college grade.  This development was reached
with different degrees of speed in different institutions: Hampton is
still a high school, while Fisk University started her college in 1871,
and Spelman Seminary about 1896.  In all cases the aim was
identical,--to maintain the standards of the lower training by giving
teachers and leaders the best practicable training; and above all, to
furnish the black world with adequate standards of human culture and
lofty ideals of life.  It was not enough that the teachers of teachers
should be trained in technical normal methods; they must also, so far
as possible, be broad-minded, cultured men and women, to scatter
civilization among a people whose ignorance was not simply of letters,
but of life itself.

It can thus be seen that the work of education in the South began with
higher institutions of training, which threw off as their foliage
common schools, and later industrial schools, and at the same time
strove to shoot their roots ever deeper toward college and university
training.  That this was an inevitable and necessary development,
sooner or later, goes without saying; but there has been, and still is,
a question in many minds if the natural growth was not forced, and if
the higher training was not either overdone or done with cheap and
unsound methods.  Among white Southerners this feeling is widespread
and positive.  A prominent Southern journal voiced this in a recent
editorial.

"The experiment that has been made to give the colored students
classical training has not been satisfactory.  Even though many were
able to pursue the course, most of them did so in a parrot-like way,
learning what was taught, but not seeming to appropriate the truth and
import of their instruction, and graduating without sensible aim or
valuable occupation for their future.  The whole scheme has proved a
waste of time, efforts, and the money of the state."

While most fair-minded men would recognize this as extreme and
overdrawn, still without doubt many are asking, Are there a sufficient
number of Negroes ready for college training to warrant the
undertaking?  Are not too many students prematurely forced into this
work?  Does it not have the effect of dissatisfying the young Negro
with his environment?  And do these graduates succeed in real life?
Such natural questions cannot be evaded, nor on the other hand must a
Nation naturally skeptical as to Negro ability assume an unfavorable
answer without careful inquiry and patient openness to conviction.  We
must not forget that most Americans answer all queries regarding the
Negro a priori, and that the least that human courtesy can do is to
listen to evidence.

The advocates of the higher education of the Negro would be the last to
deny the incompleteness and glaring defects of the present system: too
many institutions have attempted to do college work, the work in some
cases has not been thoroughly done, and quantity rather than quality
has sometimes been sought.  But all this can be said of higher
education throughout the land; it is the almost inevitable incident of
educational growth, and leaves the deeper question of the legitimate
demand for the higher training of Negroes untouched.  And this latter
question can be settled in but one way,--by a first-hand study of the
facts.  If we leave out of view all institutions which have not
actually graduated students from a course higher than that of a New
England high school, even though they be called colleges; if then we
take the thirty-four remaining institutions, we may clear up many
misapprehensions by asking searchingly, What kind of institutions are
they? what do they teach? and what sort of men do they graduate?

And first we may say that this type of college, including Atlanta,
Fisk, and Howard, Wilberforce and Claflin, Shaw, and the rest, is
peculiar, almost unique.  Through the shining trees that whisper before
me as I write, I catch glimpses of a boulder of New England granite,
covering a grave, which graduates of Atlanta University have placed
there,--


   "GRATEFUL MEMORY OF THEIR FORMER TEACHER
   AND FRIEND AND OF THE UNSELFISH LIFE HE LIVED,
   AND THE NOBLE WORK HE WROUGHT; THAT THEY,
   THEIR CHILDREN, AND THEIR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN
              MIGHT BE BLESSED."


This was the gift of New England to the freed Negro: not alms, but a
friend; not cash, but character.  It was not and is not money these
seething millions want, but love and sympathy, the pulse of hearts
beating with red blood;--a gift which to-day only their own kindred and
race can bring to the masses, but which once saintly souls brought to
their favored children in the crusade of the sixties, that finest thing
in American history, and one of the few things untainted by sordid
greed and cheap vainglory.  The teachers in these institutions came not
to keep the Negroes in their place, but to raise them out of the
defilement of the places where slavery had wallowed them.  The colleges
they founded were social settlements; homes where the best of the sons
of the freedmen came in close and sympathetic touch with the best
traditions of New England.  They lived and ate together, studied and
worked, hoped and harkened in the dawning light.  In actual formal
content their curriculum was doubtless old-fashioned, but in
educational power it was supreme, for it was the contact of living
souls.

From such schools about two thousand Negroes have gone forth with the
bachelor's degree.  The number in itself is enough to put at rest the
argument that too large a proportion of Negroes are receiving higher
training.  If the ratio to population of all Negro students throughout
the land, in both college and secondary training, be counted,
Commissioner Harris assures us "it must be increased to five times its
present average" to equal the average of the land.

Fifty years ago the ability of Negro students in any appreciable
numbers to master a modern college course would have been difficult to
prove.  To-day it is proved by the fact that four hundred Negroes, many
of whom have been reported as brilliant students, have received the
bachelor's degree from Harvard, Yale, Oberlin, and seventy other
leading colleges.  Here we have, then, nearly twenty-five hundred Negro
graduates, of whom the crucial query must be made, How far did their
training fit them for life?  It is of course extremely difficult to
collect satisfactory data on such a point,--difficult to reach the men,
to get trustworthy testimony, and to gauge that testimony by any
generally acceptable criterion of success.  In 1900, the Conference at
Atlanta University undertook to study these graduates, and published
the results.  First they sought to know what these graduates were
doing, and succeeded in getting answers from nearly two-thirds of the
living.  The direct testimony was in almost all cases corroborated by
the reports of the colleges where they graduated, so that in the main
the reports were worthy of credence.  Fifty-three per cent of these
graduates were teachers,--presidents of institutions, heads of normal
schools, principals of city school-systems, and the like.  Seventeen
per cent were clergymen; another seventeen per cent were in the
professions, chiefly as physicians.  Over six per cent were merchants,
farmers, and artisans, and four per cent were in the government
civil-service.  Granting even that a considerable proportion of the
third unheard from are unsuccessful, this is a record of usefulness.
Personally I know many hundreds of these graduates, and have
corresponded with more than a thousand; through others I have followed
carefully the life-work of scores; I have taught some of them and some
of the pupils whom they have taught, lived in homes which they have
builded, and looked at life through their eyes.  Comparing them as a
class with my fellow students in New England and in Europe, I cannot
hesitate in saying that nowhere have I met men and women with a broader
spirit of helpfulness, with deeper devotion to their life-work, or with
more consecrated determination to succeed in the face of bitter
difficulties than among Negro college-bred men.  They have, to be sure,
their proportion of ne'er-do-wells, their pedants and lettered fools,
but they have a surprisingly small proportion of them; they have not
that culture of manner which we instinctively associate with university
men, forgetting that in reality it is the heritage from cultured homes,
and that no people a generation removed from slavery can escape a
certain unpleasant rawness and gaucherie, despite the best of training.

With all their larger vision and deeper sensibility, these men have
usually been conservative, careful leaders.  They have seldom been
agitators, have withstood the temptation to head the mob, and have
worked steadily and faithfully in a thousand communities in the South.
As teachers, they have given the South a commendable system of city
schools and large numbers of private normal-schools and academies.
Colored college-bred men have worked side by side with white college
graduates at Hampton; almost from the beginning the backbone of
Tuskegee's teaching force has been formed of graduates from Fisk and
Atlanta.  And to-day the institute is filled with college graduates,
from the energetic wife of the principal down to the teacher of
agriculture, including nearly half of the executive council and a
majority of the heads of departments.  In the professions, college men
are slowly but surely leavening the Negro church, are healing and
preventing the devastations of disease, and beginning to furnish legal
protection for the liberty and property of the toiling masses.  All
this is needful work.  Who would do it if Negroes did not?  How could
Negroes do it if they were not trained carefully for it?  If white
people need colleges to furnish teachers, ministers, lawyers, and
doctors, do black people need nothing of the sort?

If it is true that there are an appreciable number of Negro youth in
the land capable by character and talent to receive that higher
training, the end of which is culture, and if the two and a half
thousand who have had something of this training in the past have in
the main proved themselves useful to their race and generation, the
question then comes, What place in the future development of the South
ought the Negro college and college-bred man to occupy?  That the
present social separation and acute race-sensitiveness must eventually
yield to the influences of culture, as the South grows civilized, is
clear.  But such transformation calls for singular wisdom and patience.
If, while the healing of this vast sore is progressing, the races are
to live for many years side by side, united in economic effort, obeying
a common government, sensitive to mutual thought and feeling, yet
subtly and silently separate in many matters of deeper human
intimacy,--if this unusual and dangerous development is to progress
amid peace and order, mutual respect and growing intelligence, it will
call for social surgery at once the delicatest and nicest in modern
history.  It will demand broad-minded, upright men, both white and
black, and in its final accomplishment American civilization will
triumph.  So far as white men are concerned, this fact is to-day being
recognized in the South, and a happy renaissance of university
education seems imminent.  But the very voices that cry hail to this
good work are, strange to relate, largely silent or antagonistic to the
higher education of the Negro.

Strange to relate! for this is certain, no secure civilization can be
built in the South with the Negro as an ignorant, turbulent
proletariat.  Suppose we seek to remedy this by making them laborers
and nothing more: they are not fools, they have tasted of the Tree of
Life, and they will not cease to think, will not cease attempting to
read the riddle of the world.  By taking away their best equipped
teachers and leaders, by slamming the door of opportunity in the faces
of their bolder and brighter minds, will you make them satisfied with
their lot? or will you not rather transfer their leading from the hands
of men taught to think to the hands of untrained demagogues?  We ought
not to forget that despite the pressure of poverty, and despite the
active discouragement and even ridicule of friends, the demand for
higher training steadily increases among Negro youth: there were, in
the years from 1875 to 1880, 22 Negro graduates from Northern colleges;
from 1885 to 1890 there were 43, and from 1895 to 1900, nearly 100
graduates.  From Southern Negro colleges there were, in the same three
periods, 143, 413, and over 500 graduates.  Here, then, is the plain
thirst for training; by refusing to give this Talented Tenth the key to
knowledge, can any sane man imagine that they will lightly lay aside
their yearning and contentedly become hewers of wood and drawers of
water?

No. The dangerously clear logic of the Negro's position will more and
more loudly assert itself in that day when increasing wealth and more
intricate social organization preclude the South from being, as it so
largely is, simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk.  Such
waste of energy cannot be spared if the South is to catch up with
civilization.  And as the black third of the land grows in thrift and
skill, unless skilfully guided in its larger philosophy, it must more
and more brood over the red past and the creeping, crooked present,
until it grasps a gospel of revolt and revenge and throws its new-found
energies athwart the current of advance.  Even to-day the masses of the
Negroes see all too clearly the anomalies of their position and the
moral crookedness of yours.  You may marshal strong indictments against
them, but their counter-cries, lacking though they be in formal logic,
have burning truths within them which you may not wholly ignore, O
Southern Gentlemen!  If you deplore their presence here, they ask, Who
brought us?  When you cry, Deliver us from the vision of intermarriage,
they answer that legal marriage is infinitely better than systematic
concubinage and prostitution.  And if in just fury you accuse their
vagabonds of violating women, they also in fury quite as just may
reply: The rape which your gentlemen have done against helpless black
women in defiance of your own laws is written on the foreheads of two
millions of mulattoes, and written in ineffaceable blood.  And finally,
when you fasten crime upon this race as its peculiar trait, they answer
that slavery was the arch-crime, and lynching and lawlessness its twin
abortions; that color and race are not crimes, and yet it is they which
in this land receive most unceasing condemnation, North, East, South,
and West.

I will not say such arguments are wholly justified,--I will not insist
that there is no other side to the shield; but I do say that of the
nine millions of Negroes in this nation, there is scarcely one out of
the cradle to whom these arguments do not daily present themselves in
the guise of terrible truth.  I insist that the question of the future
is how best to keep these millions from brooding over the wrongs of the
past and the difficulties of the present, so that all their energies
may be bent toward a cheerful striving and cooperation with their white
neighbors toward a larger, juster, and fuller future.  That one wise
method of doing this lies in the closer knitting of the Negro to the
great industrial possibilities of the South is a great truth.  And this
the common schools and the manual training and trade schools are
working to accomplish.  But these alone are not enough.  The
foundations of knowledge in this race, as in others, must be sunk deep
in the college and university if we would build a solid, permanent
structure.  Internal problems of social advance must inevitably come,
--problems of work and wages, of families and homes, of morals and the
true valuing of the things of life; and all these and other inevitable
problems of civilization the Negro must meet and solve largely for
himself, by reason of his isolation; and can there be any possible
solution other than by study and thought and an appeal to the rich
experience of the past?  Is there not, with such a group and in such a
crisis, infinitely more danger to be apprehended from half-trained
minds and shallow thinking than from over-education and
over-refinement?  Surely we have wit enough to found a Negro college so
manned and equipped as to steer successfully between the dilettante and
the fool.  We shall hardly induce black men to believe that if their
stomachs be full, it matters little about their brains.  They already
dimly perceive that the paths of peace winding between honest toil and
dignified manhood call for the guidance of skilled thinkers, the
loving, reverent comradeship between the black lowly and the black men
emancipated by training and culture.

The function of the Negro college, then, is clear: it must maintain the
standards of popular education, it must seek the social regeneration of
the Negro, and it must help in the solution of problems of race contact
and cooperation.  And finally, beyond all this, it must develop men.
Above our modern socialism, and out of the worship of the mass, must
persist and evolve that higher individualism which the centres of
culture protect; there must come a loftier respect for the sovereign
human soul that seeks to know itself and the world about it; that seeks
a freedom for expansion and self-development; that will love and hate
and labor in its own way, untrammeled alike by old and new.  Such souls
aforetime have inspired and guided worlds, and if we be not wholly
bewitched by our Rhinegold, they shall again.  Herein the longing of
black men must have respect: the rich and bitter depth of their
experience, the unknown treasures of their inner life, the strange
rendings of nature they have seen, may give the world new points of
view and make their loving, living, and doing precious to all human
hearts.  And to themselves in these the days that try their souls, the
chance to soar in the dim blue air above the smoke is to their finer
spirits boon and guerdon for what they lose on earth by being black.

I sit with Shakespeare and he winces not.  Across the color line I move
arm in arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling men and welcoming women
glide in gilded halls.  From out the caves of evening that swing
between the strong-limbed earth and the tracery of the stars, I summon
Aristotle and Aurelius and what soul I will, and they come all
graciously with no scorn nor condescension.  So, wed with Truth, I
dwell above the Veil.  Is this the life you grudge us, O knightly
America?  Is this the life you long to change into the dull red
hideousness of Georgia?  Are you so afraid lest peering from this high
Pisgah, between Philistine and Amalekite, we sight the Promised Land?




VII

Of the Black Belt

  I am black but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
  As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
  Look not upon me, because I am black,
  Because the sun hath looked upon me:
  My mother's children were angry with me;
  They made me the keeper of the vineyards;
  But mine own vineyard have I not kept.

  THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


Out of the North the train thundered, and we woke to see the crimson
soil of Georgia stretching away bare and monotonous right and left.
Here and there lay straggling, unlovely villages, and lean men loafed
leisurely at the depots; then again came the stretch of pines and clay.
Yet we did not nod, nor weary of the scene; for this is historic
ground.  Right across our track, three hundred and sixty years ago,
wandered the cavalcade of Hernando de Soto, looking for gold and the
Great Sea; and he and his foot-sore captives disappeared yonder in the
grim forests to the west.  Here sits Atlanta, the city of a hundred
hills, with something Western, something Southern, and something quite
its own, in its busy life.  Just this side Atlanta is the land of the
Cherokees and to the southwest, not far from where Sam Hose was
crucified, you may stand on a spot which is to-day the centre of the
Negro problem,--the centre of those nine million men who are America's
dark heritage from slavery and the slave-trade.

Not only is Georgia thus the geographical focus of our Negro
population, but in many other respects, both now and yesterday, the
Negro problems have seemed to be centered in this State.  No other
State in the Union can count a million Negroes among its citizens,--a
population as large as the slave population of the whole Union in 1800;
no other State fought so long and strenuously to gather this host of
Africans.  Oglethorpe thought slavery against law and gospel; but the
circumstances which gave Georgia its first inhabitants were not
calculated to furnish citizens over-nice in their ideas about rum and
slaves.  Despite the prohibitions of the trustees, these Georgians,
like some of their descendants, proceeded to take the law into their
own hands; and so pliant were the judges, and so flagrant the
smuggling, and so earnest were the prayers of Whitefield, that by the
middle of the eighteenth century all restrictions were swept away, and
the slave-trade went merrily on for fifty years and more.

Down in Darien, where the Delegal riots took place some summers ago,
there used to come a strong protest against slavery from the Scotch
Highlanders; and the Moravians of Ebenezer did not like the system.
But not till the Haytian Terror of Toussaint was the trade in men even
checked; while the national statute of 1808 did not suffice to stop it.
How the Africans poured in!--fifty thousand between 1790 and 1810, and
then, from Virginia and from smugglers, two thousand a year for many
years more.  So the thirty thousand Negroes of Georgia in 1790 doubled
in a decade,--were over a hundred thousand in 1810, had reached two
hundred thousand in 1820, and half a million at the time of the war.
Thus like a snake the black population writhed upward.

But we must hasten on our journey.  This that we pass as we near
Atlanta is the ancient land of the Cherokees,--that brave Indian nation
which strove so long for its fatherland, until Fate and the United
States Government drove them beyond the Mississippi.  If you wish to
ride with me you must come into the "Jim Crow Car."  There will be no
objection,--already four other white men, and a little white girl with
her nurse, are in there.  Usually the races are mixed in there; but the
white coach is all white.  Of course this car is not so good as the
other, but it is fairly clean and comfortable.  The discomfort lies
chiefly in the hearts of those four black men yonder--and in mine.

We rumble south in quite a business-like way.  The bare red clay and
pines of Northern Georgia begin to disappear, and in their place
appears a rich rolling land, luxuriant, and here and there well tilled.
This is the land of the Creek Indians; and a hard time the Georgians
had to seize it.  The towns grow more frequent and more interesting,
and brand-new cotton mills rise on every side.  Below Macon the world
grows darker; for now we approach the Black Belt,--that strange land of
shadows, at which even slaves paled in the past, and whence come now
only faint and half-intelligible murmurs to the world beyond.  The "Jim
Crow Car" grows larger and a shade better; three rough field-hands and
two or three white loafers accompany us, and the newsboy still spreads
his wares at one end.  The sun is setting, but we can see the great
cotton country as we enter it,--the soil now dark and fertile, now thin
and gray, with fruit-trees and dilapidated buildings,--all the way to
Albany.

At Albany, in the heart of the Black Belt, we stop.  Two hundred miles
south of Atlanta, two hundred miles west of the Atlantic, and one
hundred miles north of the Great Gulf lies Dougherty County, with ten
thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The Flint River winds down
from Andersonville, and, turning suddenly at Albany, the county-seat,
hurries on to join the Chattahoochee and the sea.  Andrew Jackson knew
the Flint well, and marched across it once to avenge the Indian
Massacre at Fort Mims.  That was in 1814, not long before the battle of
New Orleans; and by the Creek treaty that followed this campaign, all
Dougherty County, and much other rich land, was ceded to Georgia.
Still, settlers fought shy of this land, for the Indians were all
about, and they were unpleasant neighbors in those days.  The panic of
1837, which Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren, turned the planters from
the impoverished lands of Virginia, the Carolinas, and east Georgia,
toward the West.  The Indians were removed to Indian Territory, and
settlers poured into these coveted lands to retrieve their broken
fortunes.  For a radius of a hundred miles about Albany, stretched a
great fertile land, luxuriant with forests of pine, oak, ash, hickory,
and poplar; hot with the sun and damp with the rich black swamp-land;
and here the corner-stone of the Cotton Kingdom was laid.

Albany is to-day a wide-streeted, placid, Southern town, with a broad
sweep of stores and saloons, and flanking rows of homes,--whites
usually to the north, and blacks to the south.  Six days in the week
the town looks decidedly too small for itself, and takes frequent and
prolonged naps.  But on Saturday suddenly the whole county disgorges
itself upon the place, and a perfect flood of black peasantry pours
through the streets, fills the stores, blocks the sidewalks, chokes the
thoroughfares, and takes full possession of the town.  They are black,
sturdy, uncouth country folk, good-natured and simple, talkative to a
degree, and yet far more silent and brooding than the crowds of the
Rhine-pfalz, or Naples, or Cracow.  They drink considerable quantities
of whiskey, but do not get very drunk; they talk and laugh loudly at
times, but seldom quarrel or fight.  They walk up and down the streets,
meet and gossip with friends, stare at the shop windows, buy coffee,
cheap candy, and clothes, and at dusk drive home--happy? well no, not
exactly happy, but much happier than as though they had not come.

Thus Albany is a real capital,--a typical Southern county town, the
centre of the life of ten thousand souls; their point of contact with
the outer world, their centre of news and gossip, their market for
buying and selling, borrowing and lending, their fountain of justice
and law.  Once upon a time we knew country life so well and city life
so little, that we illustrated city life as that of a closely crowded
country district.  Now the world has well-nigh forgotten what the
country is, and we must imagine a little city of black people scattered
far and wide over three hundred lonesome square miles of land, without
train or trolley, in the midst of cotton and corn, and wide patches of
sand and gloomy soil.

It gets pretty hot in Southern Georgia in July,--a sort of dull,
determined heat that seems quite independent of the sun; so it took us
some days to muster courage enough to leave the porch and venture out
on the long country roads, that we might see this unknown world.
Finally we started.  It was about ten in the morning, bright with a
faint breeze, and we jogged leisurely southward in the valley of the
Flint.  We passed the scattered box-like cabins of the brickyard hands,
and the long tenement-row facetiously called "The Ark," and were soon
in the open country, and on the confines of the great plantations of
other days.  There is the "Joe Fields place"; a rough old fellow was
he, and had killed many a "nigger" in his day.  Twelve miles his
plantation used to run,--a regular barony.  It is nearly all gone now;
only straggling bits belong to the family, and the rest has passed to
Jews and Negroes.  Even the bits which are left are heavily mortgaged,
and, like the rest of the land, tilled by tenants.  Here is one of them
now,--a tall brown man, a hard worker and a hard drinker, illiterate,
