into the hurrying carriages.  Then, leaning back with a sigh, he said,
"This is the World."  The notion suddenly seized him to see where the
world was going; since many of the richer and brighter seemed hurrying
all one way.  So when a tall, light-haired young man and a little
talkative lady came by, he rose half hesitatingly and followed them.
Up the street they went, past stores and gay shops, across a broad
square, until with a hundred others they entered the high portal of a
great building.

He was pushed toward the ticket-office with the others, and felt in his
pocket for the new five-dollar bill he had hoarded.  There seemed
really no time for hesitation, so he drew it bravely out, passed it to
the busy clerk, and received simply a ticket but no change.  When at
last he realized that he had paid five dollars to enter he knew not
what, he stood stockstill amazed.  "Be careful," said a low voice
behind him; "you must not lynch the colored gentleman simply because
he's in your way," and a girl looked up roguishly into the eyes of her
fair-haired escort.  A shade of annoyance passed over the escort's
face.  "You WILL not understand us at the South," he said half
impatiently, as if continuing an argument.  "With all your professions,
one never sees in the North so cordial and intimate relations between
white and black as are everyday occurrences with us.  Why, I remember
my closest playfellow in boyhood was a little Negro named after me, and
surely no two,--WELL!" The man stopped short and flushed to the roots
of his hair, for there directly beside his reserved orchestra chairs
sat the Negro he had stumbled over in the hallway.  He hesitated and
grew pale with anger, called the usher and gave him his card, with a
few peremptory words, and slowly sat down.  The lady deftly changed the
subject.

All this John did not see, for he sat in a half-daze minding the scene
about him; the delicate beauty of the hall, the faint perfume, the
moving myriad of men, the rich clothing and low hum of talking seemed
all a part of a world so different from his, so strangely more
beautiful than anything he had known, that he sat in dreamland, and
started when, after a hush, rose high and clear the music of
Lohengrin's swan.  The infinite beauty of the wail lingered and swept
through every muscle of his frame, and put it all a-tune.  He closed
his eyes and grasped the elbows of the chair, touching unwittingly the
lady's arm.  And the lady drew away.  A deep longing swelled in all his
heart to rise with that clear music out of the dirt and dust of that
low life that held him prisoned and befouled.  If he could only live up
in the free air where birds sang and setting suns had no touch of
blood!  Who had called him to be the slave and butt of all?  And if he
had called, what right had he to call when a world like this lay open
before men?

Then the movement changed, and fuller, mightier harmony swelled away.
He looked thoughtfully across the hall, and wondered why the beautiful
gray-haired woman looked so listless, and what the little man could be
whispering about.  He would not like to be listless and idle, he
thought, for he felt with the music the movement of power within him.
If he but had some master-work, some life-service, hard,--aye, bitter
hard, but without the cringing and sickening servility, without the
cruel hurt that hardened his heart and soul.  When at last a soft
sorrow crept across the violins, there came to him the vision of a
far-off home, the great eyes of his sister, and the dark drawn face of
his mother.  And his heart sank below the waters, even as the sea-sand
sinks by the shores of Altamaha, only to be lifted aloft again with
that last ethereal wail of the swan that quivered and faded away into
the sky.

It left John sitting so silent and rapt that he did not for some time
notice the usher tapping him lightly on the shoulder and saying
politely, "Will you step this way, please, sir?"  A little surprised,
he arose quickly at the last tap, and, turning to leave his seat,
looked full into the face of the fair-haired young man.  For the first
time the young man recognized his dark boyhood playmate, and John knew
that it was the Judge's son.  The White John started, lifted his hand,
and then froze into his chair; the black John smiled lightly, then
grimly, and followed the usher down the aisle.  The manager was sorry,
very, very sorry,--but he explained that some mistake had been made in
selling the gentleman a seat already disposed of; he would refund the
money, of course,--and indeed felt the matter keenly, and so forth,
and--before he had finished John was gone, walking hurriedly across the
square and down the broad streets, and as he passed the park he
buttoned his coat and said, "John Jones, you're a natural-born fool."
Then he went to his lodgings and wrote a letter, and tore it up; he
wrote another, and threw it in the fire.  Then he seized a scrap of
paper and wrote: "Dear Mother and Sister--I am coming--John."

"Perhaps," said John, as he settled himself on the train, "perhaps I am
to blame myself in struggling against my manifest destiny simply
because it looks hard and unpleasant.  Here is my duty to Altamaha
plain before me; perhaps they'll let me help settle the Negro problems
there,--perhaps they won't.  'I will go in to the King, which is not
according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.'" And then he mused
and dreamed, and planned a life-work; and the train flew south.

Down in Altamaha, after seven long years, all the world knew John was
coming.  The homes were scrubbed and scoured,--above all, one; the
gardens and yards had an unwonted trimness, and Jennie bought a new
gingham.  With some finesse and negotiation, all the dark Methodists
and Presbyterians were induced to join in a monster welcome at the
Baptist Church; and as the day drew near, warm discussions arose on
every corner as to the exact extent and nature of John's
accomplishments.  It was noontide on a gray and cloudy day when he
came.  The black town flocked to the depot, with a little of the white
at the edges,--a happy throng, with "Good-mawnings" and "Howdys" and
laughing and joking and jostling.  Mother sat yonder in the window
watching; but sister Jennie stood on the platform, nervously fingering
her dress, tall and lithe, with soft brown skin and loving eyes peering
from out a tangled wilderness of hair.  John rose gloomily as the train
stopped, for he was thinking of the "Jim Crow" car; he stepped to the
platform, and paused: a little dingy station, a black crowd gaudy and
dirty, a half-mile of dilapidated shanties along a straggling ditch of
mud.  An overwhelming sense of the sordidness and narrowness of it all
seized him; he looked in vain for his mother, kissed coldly the tall,
strange girl who called him brother, spoke a short, dry word here and
there; then, lingering neither for handshaking nor gossip, started
silently up the street, raising his hat merely to the last eager old
aunty, to her open-mouthed astonishment.  The people were distinctly
bewildered.  This silent, cold man,--was this John?  Where was his
smile and hearty hand-grasp?  "'Peared kind o' down in the mouf," said
the Methodist preacher thoughtfully.  "Seemed monstus stuck up,"
complained a Baptist sister.  But the white postmaster from the edge of
the crowd expressed the opinion of his folks plainly.  "That damn
Nigger," said he, as he shouldered the mail and arranged his tobacco,
"has gone North and got plum full o' fool notions; but they won't work
in Altamaha."  And the crowd melted away.

The meeting of welcome at the Baptist Church was a failure.  Rain
spoiled the barbecue, and thunder turned the milk in the ice-cream.
When the speaking came at night, the house was crowded to overflowing.
The three preachers had especially prepared themselves, but somehow
John's manner seemed to throw a blanket over everything,--he seemed so
cold and preoccupied, and had so strange an air of restraint that the
Methodist brother could not warm up to his theme and elicited not a
single "Amen"; the Presbyterian prayer was but feebly responded to, and
even the Baptist preacher, though he wakened faint enthusiasm, got so
mixed up in his favorite sentence that he had to close it by stopping
fully fifteen minutes sooner than he meant.  The people moved uneasily
in their seats as John rose to reply.  He spoke slowly and
methodically.  The age, he said, demanded new ideas; we were far
different from those men of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries,--with broader ideas of human brotherhood and destiny.  Then
he spoke of the rise of charity and popular education, and particularly
of the spread of wealth and work.  The question was, then, he added
reflectively, looking at the low discolored ceiling, what part the
Negroes of this land would take in the striving of the new century.  He
sketched in vague outline the new Industrial School that might rise
among these pines, he spoke in detail of the charitable and
philanthropic work that might be organized, of money that might be
saved for banks and business.  Finally he urged unity, and deprecated
especially religious and denominational bickering.  "To-day," he said,
with a smile, "the world cares little whether a man be Baptist or
Methodist, or indeed a churchman at all, so long as he is good and
true.  What difference does it make whether a man be baptized in river
or washbowl, or not at all?  Let's leave all that littleness, and look
higher."  Then, thinking of nothing else, he slowly sat down.  A
painful hush seized that crowded mass.  Little had they understood of
what he said, for he spoke an unknown tongue, save the last word about
baptism; that they knew, and they sat very still while the clock
ticked.  Then at last a low suppressed snarl came from the Amen corner,
and an old bent man arose, walked over the seats, and climbed straight
up into the pulpit.  He was wrinkled and black, with scant gray and
tufted hair; his voice and hands shook as with palsy; but on his face
lay the intense rapt look of the religious fanatic.  He seized the
Bible with his rough, huge hands; twice he raised it inarticulate, and
then fairly burst into words, with rude and awful eloquence.  He
quivered, swayed, and bent; then rose aloft in perfect majesty, till
the people moaned and wept, wailed and shouted, and a wild shrieking
arose from the corners where all the pent-up feeling of the hour
gathered itself and rushed into the air.  John never knew clearly what
the old man said; he only felt himself held up to scorn and scathing
denunciation for trampling on the true Religion, and he realized with
amazement that all unknowingly he had put rough, rude hands on
something this little world held sacred.  He arose silently, and passed
out into the night.  Down toward the sea he went, in the fitful
starlight, half conscious of the girl who followed timidly after him.
When at last he stood upon the bluff, he turned to his little sister
and looked upon her sorrowfully, remembering with sudden pain how
little thought he had given her.  He put his arm about her and let her
passion of tears spend itself on his shoulder.

Long they stood together, peering over the gray unresting water.

"John," she said, "does it make every one--unhappy when they study and
learn lots of things?"

He paused and smiled.  "I am afraid it does," he said.

"And, John, are you glad you studied?"

"Yes," came the answer, slowly but positively.

She watched the flickering lights upon the sea, and said thoughtfully,
"I wish I was unhappy,--and--and," putting both arms about his neck, "I
think I am, a little, John."

It was several days later that John walked up to the Judge's house to
ask for the privilege of teaching the Negro school.  The Judge himself
met him at the front door, stared a little hard at him, and said
brusquely, "Go 'round to the kitchen door, John, and wait."  Sitting on
the kitchen steps, John stared at the corn, thoroughly perplexed.  What
on earth had come over him?  Every step he made offended some one.  He
had come to save his people, and before he left the depot he had hurt
them.  He sought to teach them at the church, and had outraged their
deepest feelings.  He had schooled himself to be respectful to the
Judge, and then blundered into his front door.  And all the time he had
meant right,--and yet, and yet, somehow he found it so hard and strange
to fit his old surroundings again, to find his place in the world about
him.  He could not remember that he used to have any difficulty in the
past, when life was glad and gay.  The world seemed smooth and easy
then.  Perhaps,--but his sister came to the kitchen door just then and
said the Judge awaited him.

The Judge sat in the dining-room amid his morning's mail, and he did
not ask John to sit down.  He plunged squarely into the business.
"You've come for the school, I suppose.  Well John, I want to speak to
you plainly.  You know I'm a friend to your people.  I've helped you
and your family, and would have done more if you hadn't got the notion
of going off.  Now I like the colored people, and sympathize with all
their reasonable aspirations; but you and I both know, John, that in
this country the Negro must remain subordinate, and can never expect to
be the equal of white men.  In their place, your people can be honest
and respectful; and God knows, I'll do what I can to help them.  But
when they want to reverse nature, and rule white men, and marry white
women, and sit in my parlor, then, by God! we'll hold them under if we
have to lynch every Nigger in the land.  Now, John, the question is,
are you, with your education and Northern notions, going to accept the
situation and teach the darkies to be faithful servants and laborers as
your fathers were,--I knew your father, John, he belonged to my
brother, and he was a good Nigger.  Well--well, are you going to be
like him, or are you going to try to put fool ideas of rising and
equality into these folks' heads, and make them discontented and
unhappy?"

"I am going to accept the situation, Judge Henderson," answered John,
with a brevity that did not escape the keen old man.  He hesitated a
moment, and then said shortly, "Very well,--we'll try you awhile.
Good-morning."

It was a full month after the opening of the Negro school that the
other John came home, tall, gay, and headstrong.  The mother wept, the
sisters sang.  The whole white town was glad.  A proud man was the
Judge, and it was a goodly sight to see the two swinging down Main
Street together.  And yet all did not go smoothly between them, for the
younger man could not and did not veil his contempt for the little
town, and plainly had his heart set on New York.  Now the one cherished
ambition of the Judge was to see his son mayor of Altamaha,
representative to the legislature, and--who could say?--governor of
Georgia.  So the argument often waxed hot between them.  "Good heavens,
father," the younger man would say after dinner, as he lighted a cigar
and stood by the fireplace, "you surely don't expect a young fellow
like me to settle down permanently in this--this God-forgotten town
with nothing but mud and Negroes?"  "I did," the Judge would answer
laconically; and on this particular day it seemed from the gathering
scowl that he was about to add something more emphatic, but neighbors
had already begun to drop in to admire his son, and the conversation
drifted.

"Heah that John is livenin' things up at the darky school," volunteered
the postmaster, after a pause.

"What now?" asked the Judge, sharply.

"Oh, nothin' in particulah,--just his almighty air and uppish ways.
B'lieve I did heah somethin' about his givin' talks on the French
Revolution, equality, and such like.  He's what I call a dangerous
Nigger."

"Have you heard him say anything out of the way?"

"Why, no,--but Sally, our girl, told my wife a lot of rot.  Then, too,
I don't need to heah: a Nigger what won't say 'sir' to a white man,
or--"

"Who is this John?" interrupted the son.

"Why, it's little black John, Peggy's son,--your old playfellow."

The young man's face flushed angrily, and then he laughed.

"Oh," said he, "it's the darky that tried to force himself into a seat
beside the lady I was escorting--"

But Judge Henderson waited to hear no more.  He had been nettled all
day, and now at this he rose with a half-smothered oath, took his hat
and cane, and walked straight to the schoolhouse.

For John, it had been a long, hard pull to get things started in the
rickety old shanty that sheltered his school.  The Negroes were rent
into factions for and against him, the parents were careless, the
children irregular and dirty, and books, pencils, and slates largely
missing.  Nevertheless, he struggled hopefully on, and seemed to see at
last some glimmering of dawn.  The attendance was larger and the
children were a shade cleaner this week.  Even the booby class in
reading showed a little comforting progress.  So John settled himself
with renewed patience this afternoon.

"Now, Mandy," he said cheerfully, "that's better; but you mustn't chop
your words up so: 'If--the-man--goes.' Why, your little brother even
wouldn't tell a story that way, now would he?"

"Naw, suh, he cain't talk."

"All right; now let's try again: 'If the man--'

"John!"

The whole school started in surprise, and the teacher half arose, as
the red, angry face of the Judge appeared in the open doorway.

"John, this school is closed.  You children can go home and get to
work.  The white people of Altamaha are not spending their money on
black folks to have their heads crammed with impudence and lies.  Clear
out!  I'll lock the door myself."

Up at the great pillared house the tall young son wandered aimlessly
about after his father's abrupt departure.  In the house there was
little to interest him; the books were old and stale, the local
newspaper flat, and the women had retired with headaches and sewing.
He tried a nap, but it was too warm.  So he sauntered out into the
fields, complaining disconsolately, "Good Lord! how long will this
imprisonment last!"  He was not a bad fellow,--just a little spoiled
and self-indulgent, and as headstrong as his proud father.  He seemed a
young man pleasant to look upon, as he sat on the great black stump at
the edge of the pines idly swinging his legs and smoking.  "Why, there
isn't even a girl worth getting up a respectable flirtation with," he
growled.  Just then his eye caught a tall, willowy figure hurrying
toward him on the narrow path.  He looked with interest at first, and
then burst into a laugh as he said, "Well, I declare, if it isn't
Jennie, the little brown kitchen-maid!  Why, I never noticed before
what a trim little body she is.  Hello, Jennie!  Why, you haven't
kissed me since I came home," he said gaily.  The young girl stared at
him in surprise and confusion,--faltered something inarticulate, and
attempted to pass.  But a wilful mood had seized the young idler, and
he caught at her arm.  Frightened, she slipped by; and half
mischievously he turned and ran after her through the tall pines.

Yonder, toward the sea, at the end of the path, came John slowly, with
his head down.  He had turned wearily homeward from the schoolhouse;
then, thinking to shield his mother from the blow, started to meet his
sister as she came from work and break the news of his dismissal to
her.  "I'll go away," he said slowly; "I'll go away and find work, and
send for them.  I cannot live here longer."  And then the fierce,
buried anger surged up into his throat.  He waved his arms and hurried
wildly up the path.

The great brown sea lay silent.  The air scarce breathed.  The dying
day bathed the twisted oaks and mighty pines in black and gold.  There
came from the wind no warning, not a whisper from the cloudless sky.
There was only a black man hurrying on with an ache in his heart,
seeing neither sun nor sea, but starting as from a dream at the
frightened cry that woke the pines, to see his dark sister struggling
in the arms of a tall and fair-haired man.

He said not a word, but, seizing a fallen limb, struck him with all the
pent-up hatred of his great black arm, and the body lay white and still
beneath the pines, all bathed in sunshine and in blood.  John looked at
it dreamily, then walked back to the house briskly, and said in a soft
voice, "Mammy, I'm going away--I'm going to be free."

She gazed at him dimly and faltered, "No'th, honey, is yo' gwine No'th
agin?"

He looked out where the North Star glistened pale above the waters, and
said, "Yes, mammy, I'm going--North."

Then, without another word, he went out into the narrow lane, up by the
straight pines, to the same winding path, and seated himself on the
great black stump, looking at the blood where the body had lain.
Yonder in the gray past he had played with that dead boy, romping
together under the solemn trees.  The night deepened; he thought of the
boys at Johnstown.  He wondered how Brown had turned out, and Carey?
And Jones,--Jones?  Why, he was Jones, and he wondered what they would
all say when they knew, when they knew, in that great long dining-room
with its hundreds of merry eyes.  Then as the sheen of the starlight
stole over him, he thought of the gilded ceiling of that vast concert
hall, heard stealing toward him the faint sweet music of the swan.
Hark! was it music, or the hurry and shouting of men?  Yes, surely!
Clear and high the faint sweet melody rose and fluttered like a living
thing, so that the very earth trembled as with the tramp of horses and
murmur of angry men.

He leaned back and smiled toward the sea, whence rose the strange
melody, away from the dark shadows where lay the noise of horses
galloping, galloping on.  With an effort he roused himself, bent
forward, and looked steadily down the pathway, softly humming the "Song
of the Bride,"--

  "Freudig gefuhrt, ziehet dahin."

Amid the trees in the dim morning twilight he watched their shadows
dancing and heard their horses thundering toward him, until at last
they came sweeping like a storm, and he saw in front that haggard
white-haired man, whose eyes flashed red with fury.  Oh, how he pitied
him,--pitied him,--and wondered if he had the coiling twisted rope.
Then, as the storm burst round him, he rose slowly to his feet and
turned his closed eyes toward the Sea.

And the world whistled in his ears.




XIV

Of the Sorrow Songs

  I walk through the churchyard
      To lay this body down;
  I know moon-rise, I know star-rise;
  I walk in the moonlight, I walk in the starlight;
  I'll lie in the grave and stretch out my arms,
  I'll go to judgment in the evening of the day,
  And my soul and thy soul shall meet that day,
      When I lay this body down.

  NEGRO SONG.


They that walked in darkness sang songs in the olden days--Sorrow
Songs--for they were weary at heart.  And so before each thought that I
have written in this book I have set a phrase, a haunting echo of these
weird old songs in which the soul of the black slave spoke to men.
Ever since I was a child these songs have stirred me strangely.  They
came out of the South unknown to me, one by one, and yet at once I knew
them as of me and of mine.  Then in after years when I came to
Nashville I saw the great temple builded of these songs towering over
the pale city.  To me Jubilee Hall seemed ever made of the songs
themselves, and its bricks were red with the blood and dust of toil.
Out of them rose for me morning, noon, and night, bursts of wonderful
melody, full of the voices of my brothers and sisters, full of the
voices of the past.

Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude grandeur God
himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in this new world has
expressed itself in vigor and ingenuity rather than in beauty.  And so
by fateful chance the Negro folk-song--the rhythmic cry of the
slave--stands to-day not simply as the sole American music, but as the
most beautiful expression of human experience born this side the seas.
It has been neglected, it has been, and is, half despised, and above
all it has been persistently mistaken and misunderstood; but
notwithstanding, it still remains as the singular spiritual heritage of
the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.

Away back in the thirties the melody of these slave songs stirred the
nation, but the songs were soon half forgotten.  Some, like "Near the
lake where drooped the willow," passed into current airs and their
source was forgotten; others were caricatured on the "minstrel" stage
and their memory died away.  Then in war-time came the singular Port
Royal experiment after the capture of Hilton Head, and perhaps for the
first time the North met the Southern slave face to face and heart to
heart with no third witness.  The Sea Islands of the Carolinas, where
they met, were filled with a black folk of primitive type, touched and
moulded less by the world about them than any others outside the Black
Belt.  Their appearance was uncouth, their language funny, but their
hearts were human and their singing stirred men with a mighty power.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson hastened to tell of these songs, and Miss
McKim and others urged upon the world their rare beauty.  But the world
listened only half credulously until the Fisk Jubilee Singers sang the
slave songs so deeply into the world's heart that it can never wholly
forget them again.

There was once a blacksmith's son born at Cadiz, New York, who in the
changes of time taught school in Ohio and helped defend Cincinnati from
Kirby Smith.  Then he fought at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg and
finally served in the Freedmen's Bureau at Nashville.  Here he formed a
Sunday-school class of black children in 1866, and sang with them and
taught them to sing.  And then they taught him to sing, and when once
the glory of the Jubilee songs passed into the soul of George L. White,
he knew his life-work was to let those Negroes sing to the world as
they had sung to him.  So in 1871 the pilgrimage of the Fisk Jubilee
Singers began.  North to Cincinnati they rode,--four half-clothed black
boys and five girl-women,--led by a man with a cause and a purpose.
They stopped at Wilberforce, the oldest of Negro schools, where a black
bishop blessed them.  Then they went, fighting cold and starvation,
shut out of hotels, and cheerfully sneered at, ever northward; and ever
the magic of their song kept thrilling hearts, until a burst of
applause in the Congregational Council at Oberlin revealed them to the
world.  They came to New York and Henry Ward Beecher dared to welcome
them, even though the metropolitan dailies sneered at his "Nigger
Minstrels."  So their songs conquered till they sang across the land
and across the sea, before Queen and Kaiser, in Scotland and Ireland,
Holland and Switzerland.  Seven years they sang, and brought back a
hundred and fifty thousand dollars to found Fisk University.

Since their day they have been imitated--sometimes well, by the singers
of Hampton and Atlanta, sometimes ill, by straggling quartettes.
Caricature has sought again to spoil the quaint beauty of the music,
and has filled the air with many debased melodies which vulgar ears
scarce know from the real.  But the true Negro folk-song still lives in
the hearts of those who have heard them truly sung and in the hearts of
the Negro people.

What are these songs, and what do they mean?  I know little of music
and can say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men,
and knowing them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of
the slave to the world.  They tell us in these eager days that life was
joyous to the black slave, careless and happy.  I can easily believe
this of some, of many.  But not all the past South, though it rose from
the dead, can gainsay the heart-touching witness of these songs.  They
are the music of an unhappy people, of the children of disappointment;
they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced longing toward a truer
world, of misty wanderings and hidden ways.

The songs are indeed the siftings of centuries; the music is far more
ancient than the words, and in it we can trace here and there signs of
development.  My grandfather's grandmother was seized by an evil Dutch
trader two centuries ago; and coming to the valleys of the Hudson and
Housatonic, black, little, and lithe, she shivered and shrank in the
harsh north winds, looked longingly at the hills, and often crooned a
heathen melody to the child between her knees, thus:

  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Ben d' nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, ben d' le.


The child sang it to his children and they to their children's
children, and so two hundred years it has travelled down to us and we
sing it to our children, knowing as little as our fathers what its
words may mean, but knowing well the meaning of its music.

This was primitive African music; it may be seen in larger form in the
strange chant which heralds "The Coming of John":

  "You may bury me in the East,
   You may bury me in the West,
   But I'll hear the trumpet sound in that morning,"

--the voice of exile.

Ten master songs, more or less, one may pluck from the forest of
melody-songs of undoubted Negro origin and wide popular currency, and
songs peculiarly characteristic of the slave.  One of these I have just
mentioned.  Another whose strains begin this book is "Nobody knows the
trouble I've seen."  When, struck with a sudden poverty, the United
States refused to fulfill its promises of land to the freedmen, a
brigadier-general went down to the Sea Islands to carry the news.  An
old woman on the outskirts of the throng began singing this song; all
the mass joined with her, swaying.  And the soldier wept.

The third song is the cradle-song of death which all men know,-"Swing
low, sweet chariot,"--whose bars begin the life story of "Alexander
Crummell."  Then there is the song of many waters, "Roll, Jordan,
roll," a mighty chorus with minor cadences.  There were many songs of
the fugitive like that which opens "The Wings of Atalanta," and the
more familiar "Been a-listening."  The seventh is the song of the End
and the Beginning--"My Lord, what a mourning! when the stars begin to
fall"; a strain of this is placed before "The Dawn of Freedom."  The
song of groping--"My way's cloudy"--begins "The Meaning of Progress";
the ninth is the song of this chapter--"Wrestlin' Jacob, the day is
a-breaking,"--a paean of hopeful strife.  The last master song is the
song of songs--"Steal away,"--sprung from "The Faith of the Fathers."

There are many others of the Negro folk-songs as striking and
characteristic as these, as, for instance, the three strains in the
third, eighth, and ninth chapters; and others I am sure could easily
make a selection on more scientific principles.  There are, too, songs
that seem to be a step removed from the more primitive types: there is
the maze-like medley, "Bright sparkles," one phrase of which heads "The
Black Belt"; the Easter carol, "Dust, dust and ashes"; the dirge, "My
mother's took her flight and gone home"; and that burst of melody
hovering over "The Passing of the First-Born"--"I hope my mother will
be there in that beautiful world on high."

These represent a third step in the development of the slave song, of
which "You may bury me in the East" is the first, and songs like "March
on" (chapter six) and "Steal away" are the second.  The first is
African music, the second Afro-American, while the third is a blending
of Negro music with the music heard in the foster land.  The result is
still distinctively Negro and the method of blending original, but the
elements are both Negro and Caucasian.  One might go further and find a
fourth step in this development, where the songs of white America have
been distinctively influenced by the slave songs or have incorporated
whole phrases of Negro melody, as "Swanee River" and "Old Black Joe."
Side by side, too, with the growth has gone the debasements and
imitations--the Negro "minstrel" songs, many of the "gospel" hymns, and
some of the contemporary "coon" songs,--a mass of music in which the
novice may easily lose himself and never find the real Negro melodies.

In these songs, I have said, the slave spoke to the world.  Such a
message is naturally veiled and half articulate.  Words and music have
lost each other and new and cant phrases of a dimly understood theology
have displaced the older sentiment.  Once in a while we catch a strange
word of an unknown tongue, as the "Mighty Myo," which figures as a
river of death; more often slight words or mere doggerel are joined to
music of singular sweetness.  Purely secular songs are few in number,
partly because many of them were turned into hymns by a change of
words, partly because the frolics were seldom heard by the stranger,
and the music less often caught.  Of nearly all the songs, however, the
music is distinctly sorrowful.  The ten master songs I have mentioned
tell in word and music of trouble and exile, of strife and hiding; they
grope toward some unseen power and sigh for rest in the End.

The words that are left to us are not without interest, and, cleared of
evident dross, they conceal much of real poetry and meaning beneath
conventional theology and unmeaning rhapsody.  Like all primitive folk,
the slave stood near to Nature's heart.  Life was a "rough and rolling
sea" like the brown Atlantic of the Sea Islands; the "Wilderness" was
the home of God, and the "lonesome valley" led to the way of life.
"Winter'll soon be over," was the picture of life and death to a
tropical imagination.  The sudden wild thunderstorms of the South awed
and impressed the Negroes,--at times the rumbling seemed to them
"mournful," at times imperious:

  "My Lord calls me,
  He calls me by the thunder,
  The trumpet sounds it in my soul."


The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words.  One sees
the ploughmen in the hot, moist furrow, singing:

  "Dere's no rain to wet you,
   Dere's no sun to burn you,
   Oh, push along, believer,
   I want to go home."


The bowed and bent old man cries, with thrice-repeated wail:

  "O Lord, keep me from sinking down,"

and he rebukes the devil of doubt who can whisper:

  "Jesus is dead and God's gone away."


Yet the soul-hunger is there, the restlessness of the savage, the wail
of the wanderer, and the plaint is put in one little phrase:

  My soul wants something that's new, that's new


Over the inner thoughts of the slaves and their relations one with
another the shadow of fear ever hung, so that we get but glimpses here
and there, and also with them, eloquent omissions and silences.  Mother
and child are sung, but seldom father; fugitive and weary wanderer call
for pity and affection, but there is little of wooing and wedding; the
rocks and the mountains are well known, but home is unknown.  Strange
blending of love and helplessness sings through the refrain:

  "Yonder's my ole mudder,
   Been waggin' at de hill so long;
  'Bout time she cross over,
   Git home bime-by."

Elsewhere comes the cry of the "motherless" and the "Farewell,
farewell, my only child."

Love-songs are scarce and fall into two categories--the frivolous and
light, and the sad.  Of deep successful love there is ominous silence,
and in one of the oldest of these songs there is a depth of history and
meaning:

  Poor Ro-sy, poor gal; Poor Ro-sy,
  poor gal; Ro-sy break my poor heart,
  Heav'n shall-a-be my home.


A black woman said of the song, "It can't be sung without a full heart
and a troubled sperrit."  The same voice sings here that sings in the
German folk-song:

    "Jetz Geh i' an's brunele, trink' aber net."


Of death the Negro showed little fear, but talked of it familiarly and
even fondly as simply a crossing of the waters, perhaps--who
knows?--back to his ancient forests again.  Later days transfigured his
fatalism, and amid the dust and dirt the toiler sang:

  "Dust, dust and ashes, fly over my grave,
   But the Lord shall bear my spirit home."


The things evidently borrowed from the surrounding world undergo
characteristic change when they enter the mouth of the slave.
Especially is this true of Bible phrases.  "Weep, O captive daughter of
Zion," is quaintly turned into "Zion, weep-a-low," and the wheels of
Ezekiel are turned every way in the mystic dreaming of the slave, till
he says:

 "There's a little wheel a-turnin' in-a-my heart."


As in olden time, the words of these hymns were improvised by some
leading minstrel of the religious band.  The circumstances of the
gathering, however, the rhythm of the songs, and the limitations of
allowable thought, confined the poetry for the most part to single or
double lines, and they seldom were expanded to quatrains or longer
tales, although there are some few examples of sustained efforts,
chiefly paraphrases of the Bible.  Three short series of verses have
always attracted me,--the one that heads this chapter, of one line of
which Thomas Wentworth Higginson has fittingly said, "Never, it seems
to me, since man first lived and suffered was his infinite longing for
peace uttered more plaintively."  The second and third are descriptions
of the Last Judgment,--the one a late improvisation, with some traces
of outside influence:


  "Oh, the stars in the elements are falling,
   And the moon drips away into blood,
   And the ransomed of the Lord are returning unto God,
   Blessed be the name of the Lord."

And the other earlier and homelier picture from the low coast lands:

  "Michael, haul the boat ashore,
   Then you'll hear the horn they blow,
   Then you'll hear the trumpet sound,
   Trumpet sound the world around,
   Trumpet sound for rich and poor,
   Trumpet sound the Jubilee,
   Trumpet sound for you and me."


Through all the sorrow of the Sorrow Songs there breathes a hope--a
faith in the ultimate justice of things.  The minor cadences of despair
change often to triumph and calm confidence.  Sometimes it is faith in
life, sometimes a faith in death, sometimes assurance of boundless
justice in some fair world beyond.  But whichever it is, the meaning is
always clear: that sometime, somewhere, men will judge men by their
souls and not by their skins.  Is such a hope justified?  Do the Sorrow
Songs sing true?

The silently growing assumption of this age is that the probation of
races is past, and that the backward races of to-day are of proven
inefficiency and not worth the saving.  Such an assumption is the
arrogance of peoples irreverent toward Time and ignorant of the deeds
of men.  A thousand years ago such an assumption, easily possible,
would have made it difficult for the Teuton to prove his right to life.
Two thousand years ago such dogmatism, readily welcome, would have
scouted the idea of blond races ever leading civilization.  So wofully
unorganized is sociological knowledge that the meaning of progress, the
meaning of "swift" and "slow" in human doing, and the limits of human
perfectability, are veiled, unanswered sphinxes on the shores of
science.  Why should AEschylus have sung two thousand years before
Shakespeare was born?  Why has civilization flourished in Europe, and
flickered, flamed, and died in Africa?  So long as the world stands
meekly dumb before such questions, shall this nation proclaim its
ignorance and unhallowed prejudices by denying freedom of opportunity
to those who brought the Sorrow Songs to the Seats of the Mighty?

Your country?  How came it yours?  Before the Pilgrims landed we were
here.  Here we have brought our three gifts and mingled them with
yours: a gift of story and song--soft, stirring melody in an
ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the gift of sweat and brawn to
beat back the wilderness, conquer the soil, and lay the foundations of
this vast economic empire two hundred years earlier than your weak
hands could have done it; the third, a gift of the Spirit.  Around us
the history of the land has centred for thrice a hundred years; out of
the nation's heart we have called all that was best to throttle and
subdue all that was worst; fire and blood, prayer and sacrifice, have
billowed over this people, and they have found peace only in the altars
of the God of Right.  Nor has our gift of the Spirit been merely
passive.  Actively we have woven ourselves with the very warp and woof
of this nation,--we fought their battles, shared their sorrow, mingled
our blood with theirs, and generation after generation have pleaded
with a headstrong, careless people to despise not Justice, Mercy, and
Truth, lest the nation be smitten with a curse.  Our song, our toil,
our cheer, and warning have been given to this nation in
blood-brotherhood.  Are not these gifts worth the giving?  Is not this
work and striving?  Would America have been America without her Negro
people?

Even so is the hope that sang in the songs of my fathers well sung.  If
somewhere in this whirl and chaos of things there dwells Eternal Good,
pitiful yet masterful, then anon in His good time America shall rend
the Veil and the prisoned shall go free.  Free, free as the sunshine
trickling down the morning into these high windows of mine, free as
yonder fresh young voices welling up to me from the caverns of brick
and mortar below--swelling with song, instinct with life, tremulous
treble and darkening bass.  My children, my little children, are
singing to the sunshine, and thus they sing:

  Let us cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler,
  Cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler, Let us
  cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler
  A-long the heav-en-ly way.

And the traveller girds himself, and sets his face toward the Morning,
and goes his way.




The Afterthought

Hear my cry, O God the Reader; vouchsafe that this my book fall not
still-born into the world wilderness.  Let there spring, Gentle One,
from out its leaves vigor of thought and thoughtful deed to reap the
harvest wonderful.  Let the ears of a guilty people tingle with truth,
and seventy millions sigh for the righteousness which exalteth nations,
in this drear day when human brotherhood is mockery and a snare.  Thus
in Thy good time may infinite reason turn the tangle straight, and
these crooked marks on a fragile leaf be not indeed




THE END








End of Project Gutenberg's The Souls of Black Folk, by W. E. B. Du Bois

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOULS OF BLACK FOLK ***

***** This file should be named 408.txt or 408.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/408/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
