their respective sides to make it difficult for them to understand each
other.  The Negro dimly personifies in the white man all his ills and
misfortunes; if he is poor, it is because the white man seizes the
fruit of his toil; if he is ignorant, it is because the white man gives
him neither time nor facilities to learn; and, indeed, if any
misfortune happens to him, it is because of some hidden machinations of
"white folks."  On the other hand, the masters and the masters' sons
have never been able to see why the Negro, instead of settling down to
be day-laborers for bread and clothes, are infected with a silly desire
to rise in the world, and why they are sulky, dissatisfied, and
careless, where their fathers were happy and dumb and faithful.  "Why,
you niggers have an easier time than I do," said a puzzled Albany
merchant to his black customer.  "Yes," he replied, "and so does yo'
hogs."

Taking, then, the dissatisfied and shiftless field-hand as a
starting-point, let us inquire how the black thousands of Dougherty
have struggled from him up toward their ideal, and what that ideal is.
All social struggle is evidenced by the rise, first of economic, then
of social classes, among a homogeneous population.  To-day the
following economic classes are plainly differentiated among these
Negroes.

A "submerged tenth" of croppers, with a few paupers; forty per cent who
are metayers and thirty-nine per cent of semi-metayers and
wage-laborers.  There are left five per cent of money-renters and six
per cent of freeholders,--the "Upper Ten" of the land.  The croppers
are entirely without capital, even in the limited sense of food or
money to keep them from seed-time to harvest.  All they furnish is
their labor; the land-owner furnishes land, stock, tools, seed, and
house; and at the end of the year the laborer gets from a third to a
half of the crop.  Out of his share, however, comes pay and interest
for food and clothing advanced him during the year.  Thus we have a
laborer without capital and without wages, and an employer whose
capital is largely his employees' wages.  It is an unsatisfactory
arrangement, both for hirer and hired, and is usually in vogue on poor
land with hard-pressed owners.

Above the croppers come the great mass of the black population who work
the land on their own responsibility, paying rent in cotton and
supported by the crop-mortgage system.  After the war this system was
attractive to the freedmen on account of its larger freedom and its
possibility for making a surplus.  But with the carrying out of the
crop-lien system, the deterioration of the land, and the slavery of
debt, the position of the metayers has sunk to a dead level of
practically unrewarded toil.  Formerly all tenants had some capital,
and often considerable; but absentee landlordism, rising rack-rent, and
failing cotton have stripped them well-nigh of all, and probably not
over half of them to-day own their mules.  The change from cropper to
tenant was accomplished by fixing the rent.  If, now, the rent fixed
was reasonable, this was an incentive to the tenant to strive.  On the
other hand, if the rent was too high, or if the land deteriorated, the
result was to discourage and check the efforts of the black peasantry.
There is no doubt that the latter case is true; that in Dougherty
County every economic advantage of the price of cotton in market and of
the strivings of the tenant has been taken advantage of by the
landlords and merchants, and swallowed up in rent and interest.  If
cotton rose in price, the rent rose even higher; if cotton fell, the
rent remained or followed reluctantly.  If the tenant worked hard and
raised a large crop, his rent was raised the next year; if that year
the crop failed, his corn was confiscated and his mule sold for debt.
There were, of course, exceptions to this,--cases of personal kindness
and forbearance; but in the vast majority of cases the rule was to
extract the uttermost farthing from the mass of the black farm laborers.

The average metayer pays from twenty to thirty per cent of his crop in
rent.  The result of such rack-rent can only be evil,--abuse and
neglect of the soil, deterioration in the character of the laborers,
and a widespread sense of injustice.  "Wherever the country is poor,"
cried Arthur Young, "it is in the hands of metayers," and "their
condition is more wretched than that of day-laborers."  He was talking
of Italy a century ago; but he might have been talking of Dougherty
County to-day.  And especially is that true to-day which he declares
was true in France before the Revolution: "The metayers are considered
as little better than menial servants, removable at pleasure, and
obliged to conform in all things to the will of the landlords."  On
this low plane half the black population of Dougherty County--perhaps
more than half the black millions of this land--are to-day struggling.

A degree above these we may place those laborers who receive money
wages for their work.  Some receive a house with perhaps a garden-spot;
then supplies of food and clothing are advanced, and certain fixed
wages are given at the end of the year, varying from thirty to sixty
dollars, out of which the supplies must be paid for, with interest.
About eighteen per cent of the population belong to this class of
semi-metayers, while twenty-two per cent are laborers paid by the month
or year, and are either "furnished" by their own savings or perhaps
more usually by some merchant who takes his chances of payment.  Such
laborers receive from thirty-five to fifty cents a day during the
working season.  They are usually young unmarried persons, some being
women; and when they marry they sink to the class of metayers, or, more
seldom, become renters.

The renters for fixed money rentals are the first of the emerging
classes, and form five per cent of the families.  The sole advantage of
this small class is their freedom to choose their crops, and the
increased responsibility which comes through having money transactions.
While some of the renters differ little in condition from the metayers,
yet on the whole they are more intelligent and responsible persons, and
are the ones who eventually become land-owners.  Their better character
and greater shrewdness enable them to gain, perhaps to demand, better
terms in rents; rented farms, varying from forty to a hundred acres,
bear an average rental of about fifty-four dollars a year.  The men who
conduct such farms do not long remain renters; either they sink to
metayers, or with a successful series of harvests rise to be
land-owners.

In 1870 the tax-books of Dougherty report no Negroes as landholders.
If there were any such at that time,--and there may have been a
few,--their land was probably held in the name of some white patron,--a
method not uncommon during slavery.  In 1875 ownership of land had
begun with seven hundred and fifty acres; ten years later this had
increased to over sixty-five hundred acres, to nine thousand acres in
1890 and ten thousand in 1900.  The total assessed property has in this
same period risen from eighty thousand dollars in 1875 to two hundred
and forty thousand dollars in 1900.

Two circumstances complicate this development and make it in some
respects difficult to be sure of the real tendencies; they are the
panic of 1893, and the low price of cotton in 1898.  Besides this, the
system of assessing property in the country districts of Georgia is
somewhat antiquated and of uncertain statistical value; there are no
assessors, and each man makes a sworn return to a tax-receiver.  Thus
public opinion plays a large part, and the returns vary strangely from
year to year.  Certainly these figures show the small amount of
accumulated capital among the Negroes, and the consequent large
dependence of their property on temporary prosperity.  They have little
to tide over a few years of economic depression, and are at the mercy
of the cotton-market far more than the whites.  And thus the
land-owners, despite their marvellous efforts, are really a transient
class, continually being depleted by those who fall back into the class
of renters or metayers, and augmented by newcomers from the masses.  Of
one hundred land-owners in 1898, half had bought their land since 1893,
a fourth between 1890 and 1893, a fifth between 1884 and 1890, and the
rest between 1870 and 1884.  In all, one hundred and eighty-five
Negroes have owned land in this county since 1875.

If all the black land-owners who had ever held land here had kept it or
left it in the hands of black men, the Negroes would have owned nearer
thirty thousand acres than the fifteen thousand they now hold.  And yet
these fifteen thousand acres are a creditable showing,--a proof of no
little weight of the worth and ability of the Negro people.  If they
had been given an economic start at Emancipation, if they had been in
an enlightened and rich community which really desired their best good,
then we might perhaps call such a result small or even insignificant.
But for a few thousand poor ignorant field-hands, in the face of
poverty, a falling market, and social stress, to save and capitalize
two hundred thousand dollars in a generation has meant a tremendous
effort.  The rise of a nation, the pressing forward of a social class,
means a bitter struggle, a hard and soul-sickening battle with the
world such as few of the more favored classes know or appreciate.

Out of the hard economic conditions of this portion of the Black Belt,
only six per cent of the population have succeeded in emerging into
peasant proprietorship; and these are not all firmly fixed, but grow
and shrink in number with the wavering of the cotton-market.  Fully
ninety-four per cent have struggled for land and failed, and half of
them sit in hopeless serfdom.  For these there is one other avenue of
escape toward which they have turned in increasing numbers, namely,
migration to town.  A glance at the distribution of land among the
black owners curiously reveals this fact.  In 1898 the holdings were as
follows: Under forty acres, forty-nine families; forty to two hundred
and fifty acres, seventeen families; two hundred and fifty to one
thousand acres, thirteen families; one thousand or more acres, two
families.  Now in 1890 there were forty-four holdings, but only nine of
these were under forty acres.  The great increase of holdings, then,
has come in the buying of small homesteads near town, where their
owners really share in the town life; this is a part of the rush to
town.  And for every land-owner who has thus hurried away from the
narrow and hard conditions of country life, how many field-hands, how
many tenants, how many ruined renters, have joined that long
procession?  Is it not strange compensation?  The sin of the country
districts is visited on the town, and the social sores of city life
to-day may, here in Dougherty County, and perhaps in many places near
and far, look for their final healing without the city walls.




IX

Of the Sons of Master and Man

  Life treads on life, and heart on heart;
  We press too close in church and mart
  To keep a dream or grave apart.

  MRS. BROWNING.


The world-old phenomenon of the contact of diverse races of men is to
have new exemplification during the new century.  Indeed, the
characteristic of our age is the contact of European civilization with
the world's undeveloped peoples.  Whatever we may say of the results of
such contact in the past, it certainly forms a chapter in human action
not pleasant to look back upon.  War, murder, slavery, extermination,
and debauchery,--this has again and again been the result of carrying
civilization and the blessed gospel to the isles of the sea and the
heathen without the law.  Nor does it altogether satisfy the conscience
of the modern world to be told complacently that all this has been
right and proper, the fated triumph of strength over weakness, of
righteousness over evil, of superiors over inferiors.  It would
certainly be soothing if one could readily believe all this; and yet
there are too many ugly facts for everything to be thus easily
explained away.  We feel and know that there are many delicate
differences in race psychology, numberless changes that our crude
social measurements are not yet able to follow minutely, which explain
much of history and social development.  At the same time, too, we know
that these considerations have never adequately explained or excused
the triumph of brute force and cunning over weakness and innocence.

It is, then, the strife of all honorable men of the twentieth century
to see that in the future competition of races the survival of the
fittest shall mean the triumph of the good, the beautiful, and the
true; that we may be able to preserve for future civilization all that
is really fine and noble and strong, and not continue to put a premium
on greed and impudence and cruelty.  To bring this hope to fruition, we
are compelled daily to turn more and more to a conscientious study of
the phenomena of race-contact,--to a study frank and fair, and not
falsified and colored by our wishes or our fears.  And we have in the
South as fine a field for such a study as the world affords,--a field,
to be sure, which the average American scientist deems somewhat beneath
his dignity, and which the average man who is not a scientist knows all
about, but nevertheless a line of study which by reason of the enormous
race complications with which God seems about to punish this nation
must increasingly claim our sober attention, study, and thought, we
must ask, what are the actual relations of whites and blacks in the
South? and we must be answered, not by apology or fault-finding, but by
a plain, unvarnished tale.

In the civilized life of to-day the contact of men and their relations
to each other fall in a few main lines of action and communication:
there is, first, the physical proximity of home and dwelling-places,
the way in which neighborhoods group themselves, and the contiguity of
neighborhoods.  Secondly, and in our age chiefest, there are the
economic relations,--the methods by which individuals cooperate for
earning a living, for the mutual satisfaction of wants, for the
production of wealth.  Next, there are the political relations, the
cooperation in social control, in group government, in laying and
paying the burden of taxation.  In the fourth place there are the less
tangible but highly important forms of intellectual contact and
commerce, the interchange of ideas through conversation and conference,
through periodicals and libraries; and, above all, the gradual
formation for each community of that curious tertium quid which we call
public opinion.  Closely allied with this come the various forms of
social contact in everyday life, in travel, in theatres, in house
gatherings, in marrying and giving in marriage.  Finally, there are the
varying forms of religious enterprise, of moral teaching and benevolent
endeavor.  These are the principal ways in which men living in the same
communities are brought into contact with each other.  It is my present
task, therefore, to indicate, from my point of view, how the black race
in the South meet and mingle with the whites in these matters of
everyday life.

First, as to physical dwelling.  It is usually possible to draw in
nearly every Southern community a physical color-line on the map, on
the one side of which whites dwell and on the other Negroes.  The
winding and intricacy of the geographical color-line varies, of course,
in different communities.  I know some towns where a straight line
drawn through the middle of the main street separates nine-tenths of
the whites from nine-tenths of the blacks.  In other towns the older
settlement of whites has been encircled by a broad band of blacks; in
still other cases little settlements or nuclei of blacks have sprung up
amid surrounding whites.  Usually in cities each street has its
distinctive color, and only now and then do the colors meet in close
proximity.  Even in the country something of this segregation is
manifest in the smaller areas, and of course in the larger phenomena of
the Black Belt.

All this segregation by color is largely independent of that natural
clustering by social grades common to all communities.  A Negro slum
may be in dangerous proximity to a white residence quarter, while it is
quite common to find a white slum planted in the heart of a respectable
Negro district.  One thing, however, seldom occurs: the best of the
whites and the best of the Negroes almost never live in anything like
close proximity.  It thus happens that in nearly every Southern town
and city, both whites and blacks see commonly the worst of each other.
This is a vast change from the situation in the past, when, through the
close contact of master and house-servant in the patriarchal big house,
one found the best of both races in close contact and sympathy, while
at the same time the squalor and dull round of toil among the
field-hands was removed from the sight and hearing of the family.  One
can easily see how a person who saw slavery thus from his father's
parlors, and sees freedom on the streets of a great city, fails to
grasp or comprehend the whole of the new picture.  On the other hand,
the settled belief of the mass of the Negroes that the Southern white
people do not have the black man's best interests at heart has been
intensified in later years by this continual daily contact of the
better class of blacks with the worst representatives of the white race.

Coming now to the economic relations of the races, we are on ground
made familiar by study, much discussion, and no little philanthropic
effort.  And yet with all this there are many essential elements in the
cooperation of Negroes and whites for work and wealth that are too
readily overlooked or not thoroughly understood.  The average American
can easily conceive of a rich land awaiting development and filled with
black laborers.  To him the Southern problem is simply that of making
efficient workingmen out of this material, by giving them the requisite
technical skill and the help of invested capital.  The problem,
however, is by no means as simple as this, from the obvious fact that
these workingmen have been trained for centuries as slaves.  They
exhibit, therefore, all the advantages and defects of such training;
they are willing and good-natured, but not self-reliant, provident, or
careful.  If now the economic development of the South is to be pushed
to the verge of exploitation, as seems probable, then we have a mass of
workingmen thrown into relentless competition with the workingmen of
the world, but handicapped by a training the very opposite to that of
the modern self-reliant democratic laborer.  What the black laborer
needs is careful personal guidance, group leadership of men with hearts
in their bosoms, to train them to foresight, carefulness, and honesty.
Nor does it require any fine-spun theories of racial differences to
prove the necessity of such group training after the brains of the race
have been knocked out by two hundred and fifty years of assiduous
education in submission, carelessness, and stealing.  After
Emancipation, it was the plain duty of some one to assume this group
leadership and training of the Negro laborer.  I will not stop here to
inquire whose duty it was--whether that of the white ex-master who had
profited by unpaid toil, or the Northern philanthropist whose
persistence brought on the crisis, or the National Government whose
edict freed the bondmen; I will not stop to ask whose duty it was, but
I insist it was the duty of some one to see that these workingmen were
not left alone and unguided, without capital, without land, without
skill, without economic organization, without even the bald protection
of law, order, and decency,--left in a great land, not to settle down
to slow and careful internal development, but destined to be thrown
almost immediately into relentless and sharp competition with the best
of modern workingmen under an economic system where every participant
is fighting for himself, and too often utterly regardless of the rights
or welfare of his neighbor.

For we must never forget that the economic system of the South to-day
which has succeeded the old regime is not the same system as that of
the old industrial North, of England, or of France, with their
trade-unions, their restrictive laws, their written and unwritten
commercial customs, and their long experience.  It is, rather, a copy
of that England of the early nineteenth century, before the factory
acts,--the England that wrung pity from thinkers and fired the wrath of
Carlyle.  The rod of empire that passed from the hands of Southern
gentlemen in 1865, partly by force, partly by their own petulance, has
never returned to them.  Rather it has passed to those men who have
come to take charge of the industrial exploitation of the New
South,--the sons of poor whites fired with a new thirst for wealth and
power, thrifty and avaricious Yankees, and unscrupulous immigrants.
Into the hands of these men the Southern laborers, white and black,
have fallen; and this to their sorrow.  For the laborers as such, there
is in these new captains of industry neither love nor hate, neither
sympathy nor romance; it is a cold question of dollars and dividends.
Under such a system all labor is bound to suffer.  Even the white
laborers are not yet intelligent, thrifty, and well trained enough to
maintain themselves against the powerful inroads of organized capital.
The results among them, even, are long hours of toil, low wages, child
labor, and lack of protection against usury and cheating.  But among
the black laborers all this is aggravated, first, by a race prejudice
which varies from a doubt and distrust among the best element of whites
to a frenzied hatred among the worst; and, secondly, it is aggravated,
as I have said before, by the wretched economic heritage of the
freedmen from slavery.  With this training it is difficult for the
freedman to learn to grasp the opportunities already opened to him, and
the new opportunities are seldom given him, but go by favor to the
whites.

Left by the best elements of the South with little protection or
oversight, he has been made in law and custom the victim of the worst
and most unscrupulous men in each community.  The crop-lien system
which is depopulating the fields of the South is not simply the result
of shiftlessness on the part of Negroes, but is also the result of
cunningly devised laws as to mortgages, liens, and misdemeanors, which
can be made by conscienceless men to entrap and snare the unwary until
escape is impossible, further toil a farce, and protest a crime.  I
have seen, in the Black Belt of Georgia, an ignorant, honest Negro buy
and pay for a farm in installments three separate times, and then in
the face of law and decency the enterprising American who sold it to
him pocketed the money and deed and left the black man landless, to
labor on his own land at thirty cents a day.  I have seen a black
farmer fall in debt to a white storekeeper, and that storekeeper go to
his farm and strip it of every single marketable article,--mules,
ploughs, stored crops, tools, furniture, bedding, clocks,
looking-glass,--and all this without a sheriff or officer, in the face
of the law for homestead exemptions, and without rendering to a single
responsible person any account or reckoning.  And such proceedings can
happen, and will happen, in any community where a class of ignorant
toilers are placed by custom and race-prejudice beyond the pale of
sympathy and race-brotherhood.  So long as the best elements of a
community do not feel in duty bound to protect and train and care for
the weaker members of their group, they leave them to be preyed upon by
these swindlers and rascals.

This unfortunate economic situation does not mean the hindrance of all
advance in the black South, or the absence of a class of black
landlords and mechanics who, in spite of disadvantages, are
accumulating property and making good citizens.  But it does mean that
this class is not nearly so large as a fairer economic system might
easily make it, that those who survive in the competition are
handicapped so as to accomplish much less than they deserve to, and
that, above all, the personnel of the successful class is left to
chance and accident, and not to any intelligent culling or reasonable
methods of selection.  As a remedy for this, there is but one possible
procedure.  We must accept some of the race prejudice in the South as a
fact,--deplorable in its intensity, unfortunate in results, and
dangerous for the future, but nevertheless a hard fact which only time
can efface.  We cannot hope, then, in this generation, or for several
generations, that the mass of the whites can be brought to assume that
close sympathetic and self-sacrificing leadership of the blacks which
their present situation so eloquently demands.  Such leadership, such
social teaching and example, must come from the blacks themselves.  For
some time men doubted as to whether the Negro could develop such
leaders; but to-day no one seriously disputes the capability of
individual Negroes to assimilate the culture and common sense of modern
civilization, and to pass it on, to some extent at least, to their
fellows.  If this is true, then here is the path out of the economic
situation, and here is the imperative demand for trained Negro leaders
of character and intelligence,--men of skill, men of light and leading,
college-bred men, black captains of industry, and missionaries of
culture; men who thoroughly comprehend and know modern civilization,
and can take hold of Negro communities and raise and train them by
force of precept and example, deep sympathy, and the inspiration of
common blood and ideals.  But if such men are to be effective they must
have some power,--they must be backed by the best public opinion of
these communities, and able to wield for their objects and aims such
weapons as the experience of the world has taught are indispensable to
human progress.

Of such weapons the greatest, perhaps, in the modern world is the power
of the ballot; and this brings me to a consideration of the third form
of contact between whites and blacks in the South,--political activity.

In the attitude of the American mind toward Negro suffrage can be
traced with unusual accuracy the prevalent conceptions of government.
In the fifties we were near enough the echoes of the French Revolution
to believe pretty thoroughly in universal suffrage.  We argued, as we
thought then rather logically, that no social class was so good, so
true, and so disinterested as to be trusted wholly with the political
destiny of its neighbors; that in every state the best arbiters of
their own welfare are the persons directly affected; consequently that
it is only by arming every hand with a ballot,--with the right to have
a voice in the policy of the state,--that the greatest good to the
greatest number could be attained.  To be sure, there were objections
to these arguments, but we thought we had answered them tersely and
convincingly; if some one complained of the ignorance of voters, we
answered, "Educate them."  If another complained of their venality, we
replied, "Disfranchise them or put them in jail."  And, finally, to the
men who feared demagogues and the natural perversity of some human
beings we insisted that time and bitter experience would teach the most
hardheaded.  It was at this time that the question of Negro suffrage in
the South was raised.  Here was a defenceless people suddenly made
free.  How were they to be protected from those who did not believe in
their freedom and were determined to thwart it?  Not by force, said the
North; not by government guardianship, said the South; then by the
ballot, the sole and legitimate defence of a free people, said the
Common Sense of the Nation.  No one thought, at the time, that the
ex-slaves could use the ballot intelligently or very effectively; but
they did think that the possession of so great power by a great class
in the nation would compel their fellows to educate this class to its
intelligent use.

Meantime, new thoughts came to the nation: the inevitable period of
moral retrogression and political trickery that ever follows in the
wake of war overtook us.  So flagrant became the political scandals
that reputable men began to leave politics alone, and politics
consequently became disreputable.  Men began to pride themselves on
having nothing to do with their own government, and to agree tacitly
with those who regarded public office as a private perquisite.  In this
state of mind it became easy to wink at the suppression of the Negro
vote in the South, and to advise self-respecting Negroes to leave
politics entirely alone.  The decent and reputable citizens of the
North who neglected their own civic duties grew hilarious over the
exaggerated importance with which the Negro regarded the franchise.
Thus it easily happened that more and more the better class of Negroes
followed the advice from abroad and the pressure from home, and took no
further interest in politics, leaving to the careless and the venal of
their race the exercise of their rights as voters.  The black vote that
still remained was not trained and educated, but further debauched by
open and unblushing bribery, or force and fraud; until the Negro voter
was thoroughly inoculated with the idea that politics was a method of
private gain by disreputable means.

And finally, now, to-day, when we are awakening to the fact that the
perpetuity of republican institutions on this continent depends on the
purification of the ballot, the civic training of voters, and the
raising of voting to the plane of a solemn duty which a patriotic
citizen neglects to his peril and to the peril of his children's
children,--in this day, when we are striving for a renaissance of civic
virtue, what are we going to say to the black voter of the South?  Are
we going to tell him still that politics is a disreputable and useless
form of human activity?  Are we going to induce the best class of
Negroes to take less and less interest in government, and to give up
their right to take such an interest, without a protest?  I am not
saying a word against all legitimate efforts to purge the ballot of
ignorance, pauperism, and crime.  But few have pretended that the
present movement for disfranchisement in the South is for such a
purpose; it has been plainly and frankly declared in nearly every case
that the object of the disfranchising laws is the elimination of the
black man from politics.

Now, is this a minor matter which has no influence on the main question
of the industrial and intellectual development of the Negro?  Can we
establish a mass of black laborers and artisans and landholders in the
South who, by law and public opinion, have absolutely no voice in
shaping the laws under which they live and work?  Can the modern
organization of industry, assuming as it does free democratic
government and the power and ability of the laboring classes to compel
respect for their welfare,--can this system be carried out in the South
when half its laboring force is voiceless in the public councils and
powerless in its own defence?  To-day the black man of the South has
almost nothing to say as to how much he shall be taxed, or how those
taxes shall be expended; as to who shall execute the laws, and how they
shall do it; as to who shall make the laws, and how they shall be made.
It is pitiable that frantic efforts must be made at critical times to
get law-makers in some States even to listen to the respectful
presentation of the black man's side of a current controversy.  Daily
the Negro is coming more and more to look upon law and justice, not as
protecting safeguards, but as sources of humiliation and oppression.
The laws are made by men who have little interest in him; they are
executed by men who have absolutely no motive for treating the black
people with courtesy or consideration; and, finally, the accused
law-breaker is tried, not by his peers, but too often by men who would
rather punish ten innocent Negroes than let one guilty one escape.

I should be the last one to deny the patent weaknesses and shortcomings
of the Negro people; I should be the last to withhold sympathy from the
white South in its efforts to solve its intricate social problems.  I
freely acknowledged that it is possible, and sometimes best, that a
partially undeveloped people should be ruled by the best of their
stronger and better neighbors for their own good, until such time as
they can start and fight the world's battles alone.  I have already
pointed out how sorely in need of such economic and spiritual guidance
the emancipated Negro was, and I am quite willing to admit that if the
representatives of the best white Southern public opinion were the
ruling and guiding powers in the South to-day the conditions indicated
would be fairly well fulfilled.  But the point I have insisted upon and
now emphasize again, is that the best opinion of the South to-day is
not the ruling opinion.  That to leave the Negro helpless and without a
ballot to-day is to leave him not to the guidance of the best, but
rather to the exploitation and debauchment of the worst; that this is
no truer of the South than of the North,--of the North than of Europe:
in any land, in any country under modern free competition, to lay any
class of weak and despised people, be they white, black, or blue, at
the political mercy of their stronger, richer, and more resourceful
fellows, is a temptation which human nature seldom has withstood and
seldom will withstand.

Moreover, the political status of the Negro in the South is closely
connected with the question of Negro crime.  There can be no doubt that
crime among Negroes has sensibly increased in the last thirty years,
and that there has appeared in the slums of great cities a distinct
criminal class among the blacks.  In explaining this unfortunate
development, we must note two things: (1) that the inevitable result of
Emancipation was to increase crime and criminals, and (2) that the
police system of the South was primarily designed to control slaves.
As to the first point, we must not forget that under a strict slave
system there can scarcely be such a thing as crime.  But when these
variously constituted human particles are suddenly thrown broadcast on
the sea of life, some swim, some sink, and some hang suspended, to be
forced up or down by the chance currents of a busy hurrying world.  So
great an economic and social revolution as swept the South in '63 meant
a weeding out among the Negroes of the incompetents and vicious, the
beginning of a differentiation of social grades.  Now a rising group of
people are not lifted bodily from the ground like an inert solid mass,
but rather stretch upward like a living plant with its roots still
clinging in the mould.  The appearance, therefore, of the Negro
criminal was a phenomenon to be awaited; and while it causes anxiety,
it should not occasion surprise.

Here again the hope for the future depended peculiarly on careful and
delicate dealing with these criminals.  Their offences at first were
those of laziness, carelessness, and impulse, rather than of malignity
or ungoverned viciousness.  Such misdemeanors needed discriminating
treatment, firm but reformatory, with no hint of injustice, and full
proof of guilt.  For such dealing with criminals, white or black, the
South had no machinery, no adequate jails or reformatories; its police
system was arranged to deal with blacks alone, and tacitly assumed that
every white man was ipso facto a member of that police.  Thus grew up a
double system of justice, which erred on the white side by undue
leniency and the practical immunity of red-handed criminals, and erred
on the black side by undue severity, injustice, and lack of
discrimination.  For, as I have said, the police system of the South
was originally designed to keep track of all Negroes, not simply of
criminals; and when the Negroes were freed and the whole South was
convinced of the impossibility of free Negro labor, the first and
almost universal device was to use the courts as a means of reenslaving
the blacks.  It was not then a question of crime, but rather one of
color, that settled a man's conviction on almost any charge.  Thus
Negroes came to look upon courts as instruments of injustice and
oppression, and upon those convicted in them as martyrs and victims.

When, now, the real Negro criminal appeared, and instead of petty
stealing and vagrancy we began to have highway robbery, burglary,
murder, and rape, there was a curious effect on both sides the
color-line: the Negroes refused to believe the evidence of white
witnesses or the fairness of white juries, so that the greatest
deterrent to crime, the public opinion of one's own social caste, was
lost, and the criminal was looked upon as crucified rather than hanged.
On the other hand, the whites, used to being careless as to the guilt
or innocence of accused Negroes, were swept in moments of passion
beyond law, reason, and decency.  Such a situation is bound to increase
crime, and has increased it.  To natural viciousness and vagrancy are
being daily added motives of revolt and revenge which stir up all the
latent savagery of both races and make peaceful attention to economic
development often impossible.

But the chief problem in any community cursed with crime is not the
punishment of the criminals, but the preventing of the young from being
trained to crime.  And here again the peculiar conditions of the South
have prevented proper precautions.  I have seen twelve-year-old boys
working in chains on the public streets of Atlanta, directly in front
of the schools, in company with old and hardened criminals; and this
indiscriminate mingling of men and women and children makes the
chain-gangs perfect schools of crime and debauchery.  The struggle for
reformatories, which has gone on in Virginia, Georgia, and other
States, is the one encouraging sign of the awakening of some
communities to the suicidal results of this policy.

It is the public schools, however, which can be made, outside the
homes, the greatest means of training decent self-respecting citizens.
We have been so hotly engaged recently in discussing trade-schools and
the higher education that the pitiable plight of the public-school
system in the South has almost dropped from view.  Of every five
dollars spent for public education in the State of Georgia, the white
schools get four dollars and the Negro one dollar; and even then the
white public-school system, save in the cities, is bad and cries for
reform.  If this is true of the whites, what of the blacks?  I am
becoming more and more convinced, as I look upon the system of
common-school training in the South, that the national government must
soon step in and aid popular education in some way.  To-day it has been
only by the most strenuous efforts on the part of the thinking men of
the South that the Negro's share of the school fund has not been cut
down to a pittance in some half-dozen States; and that movement not
only is not dead, but in many communities is gaining strength.  What in
the name of reason does this nation expect of a people, poorly trained
and hard pressed in severe economic competition, without political
rights, and with ludicrously inadequate common-school facilities?  What
can it expect but crime and listlessness, offset here and there by the
dogged struggles of the fortunate and more determined who are
themselves buoyed by the hope that in due time the country will come to
its senses?

I have thus far sought to make clear the physical, economic, and
political relations of the Negroes and whites in the South, as I have
conceived them, including, for the reasons set forth, crime and
education.  But after all that has been said on these more tangible
matters of human contact, there still remains a part essential to a
proper description of the South which it is difficult to describe or
fix in terms easily understood by strangers.  It is, in fine, the
atmosphere of the land, the thought and feeling, the thousand and one
little actions which go to make up life.  In any community or nation it
is these little things which are most elusive to the grasp and yet most
essential to any clear conception of the group life taken as a whole.
What is thus true of all communities is peculiarly true of the South,
where, outside of written history and outside of printed law, there has
been going on for a generation as deep a storm and stress of human
souls, as intense a ferment of feeling, as intricate a writhing of
spirit, as ever a people experienced.  Within and without the sombre
veil of color vast social forces have been at work,--efforts for human
betterment, movements toward disintegration and despair, tragedies and
comedies in social and economic life, and a swaying and lifting and
sinking of human hearts which have made this land a land of mingled
sorrow and joy, of change and excitement and unrest.

The centre of this spiritual turmoil has ever been the millions of
black freedmen and their sons, whose destiny is so fatefully bound up
with that of the nation.  And yet the casual observer visiting the
South sees at first little of this.  He notes the growing frequency of
dark faces as he rides along,--but otherwise the days slip lazily on,
the sun shines, and this little world seems as happy and contented as
other worlds he has visited.  Indeed, on the question of questions--the
Negro problem--he hears so little that there almost seems to be a
conspiracy of silence; the morning papers seldom mention it, and then
usually in a far-fetched academic way, and indeed almost every one
seems to forget and ignore the darker half of the land, until the
astonished visitor is inclined to ask if after all there IS any problem
here.  But if he lingers long enough there comes the awakening: perhaps
in a sudden whirl of passion which leaves him gasping at its bitter
intensity; more likely in a gradually dawning sense of things he had
not at first noticed.  Slowly but surely his eyes begin to catch the
shadows of the color-line: here he meets crowds of Negroes and whites;
then he is suddenly aware that he cannot discover a single dark face;
or again at the close of a day's wandering he may find himself in some
strange assembly, where all faces are tinged brown or black, and where
he has the vague, uncomfortable feeling of the stranger.  He realizes
at last that silently, resistlessly, the world about flows by him in
two great streams: they ripple on in the same sunshine, they approach
and mingle their waters in seeming carelessness,--then they divide and
flow wide apart.  It is done quietly; no mistakes are made, or if one
occurs, the swift arm of the law and of public opinion swings down for
a moment, as when the other day a black man and a white woman were
arrested for talking together on Whitehall Street in Atlanta.

Now if one notices carefully one will see that between these two
worlds, despite much physical contact and daily intermingling, there is
almost no community of intellectual life or point of transference where
the thoughts and feelings of one race can come into direct contact and
sympathy with the thoughts and feelings of the other.  Before and
directly after the war, when all the best of the Negroes were domestic
servants in the best of the white families, there were bonds of
intimacy, affection, and sometimes blood relationship, between the
races.  They lived in the same home, shared in the family life, often
attended the same church, and talked and conversed with each other.
But the increasing civilization of the Negro since then has naturally
meant the development of higher classes: there are increasing numbers
of ministers, teachers, physicians, merchants, mechanics, and
independent farmers, who by nature and training are the aristocracy and
leaders of the blacks.  Between them, however, and the best element of
the whites, there is little or no intellectual commerce.  They go to
separate churches, they live in separate sections, they are strictly
separated in all public gatherings, they travel separately, and they
are beginning to read different papers and books.  To most libraries,
lectures, concerts, and museums, Negroes are either not admitted at
all, or on terms peculiarly galling to the pride of the very classes
who might otherwise be attracted.  The daily paper chronicles the
doings of the black world from afar with no great regard for accuracy;
and so on, throughout the category of means for intellectual
communication,--schools, conferences, efforts for social betterment,
and the like,--it is usually true that the very representatives of the
two races, who for mutual benefit and the welfare of the land ought to
be in complete understanding and sympathy, are so far strangers that
one side thinks all whites are narrow and prejudiced, and the other
thinks educated Negroes dangerous and insolent.  Moreover, in a land
where the tyranny of public opinion and the intolerance of criticism is
for obvious historical reasons so strong as in the South, such a
situation is extremely difficult to correct.  The white man, as well as
the Negro, is bound and barred by the color-line, and many a scheme of
friendliness and philanthropy, of broad-minded sympathy and generous
fellowship between the two has dropped still-born because some busybody
has forced the color-question to the front and brought the tremendous
force of unwritten law against the innovators.

It is hardly necessary for me to add very much in regard to the social
contact between the races.  Nothing has come to replace that finer
sympathy and love between some masters and house servants which the
radical and more uncompromising drawing of the color-line in recent
years has caused almost completely to disappear.  In a world where it
means so much to take a man by the hand and sit beside him, to look
frankly into his eyes and feel his heart beating with red blood; in a
world where a social cigar or a cup of tea together means more than
legislative halls and magazine articles and speeches,--one can imagine
the consequences of the almost utter absence of such social amenities
between estranged races, whose separation extends even to parks and
streetcars.

Here there can be none of that social going down to the people,--the
opening of heart and hand of the best to the worst, in generous
acknowledgment of a common humanity and a common destiny.  On the other
hand, in matters of simple almsgiving, where there can be no question
of social contact, and in the succor of the aged and sick, the South,
as if stirred by a feeling of its unfortunate limitations, is generous
to a fault.  The black beggar is never turned away without a good deal
more than a crust, and a call for help for the unfortunate meets quick
response.  I remember, one cold winter, in Atlanta, when I refrained
from contributing to a public relief fund lest Negroes should be
discriminated against, I afterward inquired of a friend: "Were any
black people receiving aid?"  "Why," said he, "they were all black."

And yet this does not touch the kernel of the problem.  Human
advancement is not a mere question of almsgiving, but rather of
sympathy and cooperation among classes who would scorn charity.  And
here is a land where, in the higher walks of life, in all the higher
striving for the good and noble and true, the color-line comes to
separate natural friends and coworkers; while at the bottom of the
social group, in the saloon, the gambling-hell, and the brothel, that
same line wavers and disappears.

I have sought to paint an average picture of real relations between the
sons of master and man in the South.  I have not glossed over matters
for policy's sake, for I fear we have already gone too far in that sort
of thing.  On the other hand, I have sincerely sought to let no unfair
exaggerations creep in.  I do not doubt that in some Southern
communities conditions are better than those I have indicated; while I
am no less certain that in other communities they are far worse.

Nor does the paradox and danger of this situation fail to interest and
perplex the best conscience of the South.  Deeply religious and
intensely democratic as are the mass of the whites, they feel acutely
the false position in which the Negro problems place them.  Such an
essentially honest-hearted and generous people cannot cite the
caste-levelling precepts of Christianity, or believe in equality of
opportunity for all men, without coming to feel more and more with each
generation that the present drawing of the color-line is a flat
contradiction to their beliefs and professions.  But just as often as
they come to this point, the present social condition of the Negro
stands as a menace and a portent before even the most open-minded: if
there were nothing to charge against the Negro but his blackness or
other physical peculiarities, they argue, the problem would be
comparatively simple; but what can we say to his ignorance,
shiftlessness, poverty, and crime?  can a self-respecting group hold
anything but the least possible fellowship with such persons and
survive? and shall we let a mawkish sentiment sweep away the culture of
our fathers or the hope of our children?  The argument so put is of
great strength, but it is not a whit stronger than the argument of
thinking Negroes: granted, they reply, that the condition of our masses
is bad; there is certainly on the one hand adequate historical cause
for this, and unmistakable evidence that no small number have, in spite
of tremendous disadvantages, risen to the level of American
civilization.  And when, by proscription and prejudice, these same
Negroes are classed with and treated like the lowest of their people,
simply because they are Negroes, such a policy not only discourages
thrift and intelligence among black men, but puts a direct premium on
the very things you complain of,--inefficiency and crime.  Draw lines
of crime, of incompetency, of vice, as tightly and uncompromisingly as
you will, for these things must be proscribed; but a color-line not
only does not accomplish this purpose, but thwarts it.

In the face of two such arguments, the future of the South depends on
the ability of the representatives of these opposing views to see and
appreciate and sympathize with each other's position,--for the Negro to
realize more deeply than he does at present the need of uplifting the
masses of his people, for the white people to realize more vividly than
they have yet done the deadening and disastrous effect of a
color-prejudice that classes Phillis Wheatley and Sam Hose in the same
despised class.

It is not enough for the Negroes to declare that color-prejudice is the
sole cause of their social condition, nor for the white South to reply
that their social condition is the main cause of prejudice.  They both
act as reciprocal cause and effect, and a change in neither alone will
bring the desired effect.  Both must change, or neither can improve to
any great extent.  The Negro cannot stand the present reactionary
tendencies and unreasoning drawing of the color-line indefinitely
without discouragement and retrogression.  And the condition of the
Negro is ever the excuse for further discrimination.  Only by a union
of intelligence and sympathy across the color-line in this critical
period of the Republic shall justice and right triumph,

  "That mind and soul according well,
  May make one music as before,
            But vaster."




X

Of the Faith of the Fathers

  Dim face of Beauty haunting all the world,
    Fair face of Beauty all too fair to see,
  Where the lost stars adown the heavens are hurled,--

    There, there alone for thee

    May white peace be.

  Beauty, sad face of Beauty, Mystery, Wonder,
    What are these dreams to foolish babbling men
  Who cry with little noises 'neath the thunder

    Of Ages ground to sand,

    To a little sand.

  FIONA MACLEOD.


It was out in the country, far from home, far from my foster home, on a
dark Sunday night.  The road wandered from our rambling log-house up
the stony bed of a creek, past wheat and corn, until we could hear
dimly across the fields a rhythmic cadence of song,--soft, thrilling,
powerful, that swelled and died sorrowfully in our ears.  I was a
country schoolteacher then, fresh from the East, and had never seen a
Southern Negro revival.  To be sure, we in Berkshire were not perhaps
as stiff and formal as they in Suffolk of olden time; yet we were very
quiet and subdued, and I know not what would have happened those clear
Sabbath mornings had some one punctuated the sermon with a wild scream,
or interrupted the long prayer with a loud Amen!  And so most striking
to me, as I approached the village and the little plain church perched
aloft, was the air of intense excitement that possessed that mass of
black folk.  A sort of suppressed terror hung in the air and seemed to
seize us,--a pythian madness, a demoniac possession, that lent terrible
reality to song and word.  The black and massive form of the preacher
swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips and flew at us in
singular eloquence.  The people moaned and fluttered, and then the
gaunt-cheeked brown woman beside me suddenly leaped straight into the
air and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came wail and
groan and outcry, and a scene of human passion such as I had never
conceived before.

Those who have not thus witnessed the frenzy of a Negro revival in the
untouched backwoods of the South can but dimly realize the religious
feeling of the slave; as described, such scenes appear grotesque and
funny, but as seen they are awful.  Three things characterized this
religion of the slave,--the Preacher, the Music, and the Frenzy.  The
Preacher is the most unique personality developed by the Negro on
American soil.  A leader, a politician, an orator, a "boss," an
intriguer, an idealist,--all these he is, and ever, too, the centre of
a group of men, now twenty, now a thousand in number.  The combination
of a certain adroitness with deep-seated earnestness, of tact with
consummate ability, gave him his preeminence, and helps him maintain
it.  The type, of course, varies according to time and place, from the
West Indies in the sixteenth century to New England in the nineteenth,
and from the Mississippi bottoms to cities like New Orleans or New York.

The Music of Negro religion is that plaintive rhythmic melody, with its
touching minor cadences, which, despite caricature and defilement,
still remains the most original and beautiful expression of human life
and longing yet born on American soil.  Sprung from the African
forests, where its counterpart can still be heard, it was adapted,
changed, and intensified by the tragic soul-life of the slave, until,
under the stress of law and whip, it became the one true expression of
a people's sorrow, despair, and hope.

Finally the Frenzy of "Shouting," when the Spirit of the Lord passed
by, and, seizing the devotee, made him mad with supernatural joy, was
the last essential of Negro religion and the one more devoutly believed
in than all the rest.  It varied in expression from the silent rapt
countenance or the low murmur and moan to the mad abandon of physical
fervor,--the stamping, shrieking, and shouting, the rushing to and fro
and wild waving of arms, the weeping and laughing, the vision and the
trance.  All this is nothing new in the world, but old as religion, as
Delphi and Endor.  And so firm a hold did it have on the Negro, that
many generations firmly believed that without this visible
manifestation of the God there could be no true communion with the
Invisible.

These were the characteristics of Negro religious life as developed up
to the time of Emancipation.  Since under the peculiar circumstances of
the black man's environment they were the one expression of his higher
life, they are of deep interest to the student of his development, both
socially and psychologically.  Numerous are the attractive lines of
inquiry that here group themselves.  What did slavery mean to the
African savage?  What was his attitude toward the World and Life?  What
seemed to him good and evil,--God and Devil?  Whither went his longings
and strivings, and wherefore were his heart-burnings and
disappointments?  Answers to such questions can come only from a study
of Negro religion as a development, through its gradual changes from
the heathenism of the Gold Coast to the institutional Negro church of
Chicago.

Moreover, the religious growth of millions of men, even though they be
slaves, cannot be without potent influence upon their contemporaries.
The Methodists and Baptists of America owe much of their condition to
the silent but potent influence of their millions of Negro converts.
Especially is this noticeable in the South, where theology and
religious philosophy are on this account a long way behind the North,
and where the religion of the poor whites is a plain copy of Negro
thought and methods.  The mass of "gospel" hymns which has swept
through American churches and well-nigh ruined our sense of song
consists largely of debased imitations of Negro melodies made by ears
that caught the jingle but not the music, the body but not the soul, of
the Jubilee songs.  It is thus clear that the study of Negro religion
is not only a vital part of the history of the Negro in America, but no
uninteresting part of American history.

The Negro church of to-day is the social centre of Negro life in the
United States, and the most characteristic expression of African
character.  Take a typical church in a small Virginia town: it is the
"First Baptist"--a roomy brick edifice seating five hundred or more
persons, tastefully finished in Georgia pine, with a carpet, a small
organ, and stained-glass windows.  Underneath is a large assembly room
with benches.  This building is the central club-house of a community
of a thousand or more Negroes.  Various organizations meet here,--the
church proper, the Sunday-school, two or three insurance societies,
women's societies, secret societies, and mass meetings of various
kinds.  Entertainments, suppers, and lectures are held beside the five
or six regular weekly religious services.  Considerable sums of money
are collected and expended here, employment is found for the idle,
strangers are introduced, news is disseminated and charity distributed.
At the same time this social, intellectual, and economic centre is a
religious centre of great power.  Depravity, Sin, Redemption, Heaven,
Hell, and Damnation are preached twice a Sunday after the crops are
laid by; and few indeed of the community have the hardihood to
withstand conversion.  Back of this more formal religion, the Church
often stands as a real conserver of morals, a strengthener of family
life, and the final authority on what is Good and Right.

Thus one can see in the Negro church to-day, reproduced in microcosm,
all the great world from which the Negro is cut off by color-prejudice
and social condition.  In the great city churches the same tendency is
noticeable and in many respects emphasized.  A great church like the
Bethel of Philadelphia has over eleven hundred members, an edifice
seating fifteen hundred persons and valued at one hundred thousand
dollars, an annual budget of five thousand dollars, and a government
consisting of a pastor with several assisting local preachers, an
executive and legislative board, financial boards and tax collectors;
general church meetings for making laws; sub-divided groups led by
class leaders, a company of militia, and twenty-four auxiliary
societies.  The activity of a church like this is immense and
far-reaching, and the bishops who preside over these organizations
throughout the land are among the most powerful Negro rulers in the
world.

Such churches are really governments of men, and consequently a little
investigation reveals the curious fact that, in the South, at least,
practically every American Negro is a church member.  Some, to be sure,
are not regularly enrolled, and a few do not habitually attend
services; but, practically, a proscribed people must have a social
centre, and that centre for this people is the Negro church.  The
census of 1890 showed nearly twenty-four thousand Negro churches in the
country, with a total enrolled membership of over two and a half
millions, or ten actual church members to every twenty-eight persons,
and in some Southern States one in every two persons.  Besides these
there is the large number who, while not enrolled as members, attend
and take part in many of the activities of the church.  There is an
organized Negro church for every sixty black families in the nation,
and in some States for every forty families, owning, on an average, a
thousand dollars' worth of property each, or nearly twenty-six million
dollars in all.

Such, then, is the large development of the Negro church since
Emancipation.  The question now is, What have been the successive steps
of this social history and what are the present tendencies?  First, we
must realize that no such institution as the Negro church could rear
