itself without definite historical foundations.  These foundations we
can find if we remember that the social history of the Negro did not
start in America.  He was brought from a definite social
environment,--the polygamous clan life under the headship of the chief
and the potent influence of the priest.  His religion was
nature-worship, with profound belief in invisible surrounding
influences, good and bad, and his worship was through incantation and
sacrifice.  The first rude change in this life was the slave ship and
the West Indian sugar-fields.  The plantation organization replaced the
clan and tribe, and the white master replaced the chief with far
greater and more despotic powers.  Forced and long-continued toil
became the rule of life, the old ties of blood relationship and kinship
disappeared, and instead of the family appeared a new polygamy and
polyandry, which, in some cases, almost reached promiscuity.  It was a
terrific social revolution, and yet some traces were retained of the
former group life, and the chief remaining institution was the Priest
or Medicine-man.  He early appeared on the plantation and found his
function as the healer of the sick, the interpreter of the Unknown, the
comforter of the sorrowing, the supernatural avenger of wrong, and the
one who rudely but picturesquely expressed the longing, disappointment,
and resentment of a stolen and oppressed people.  Thus, as bard,
physician, judge, and priest, within the narrow limits allowed by the
slave system, rose the Negro preacher, and under him the first church
was not at first by any means Christian nor definitely organized;
rather it was an adaptation and mingling of heathen rites among the
members of each plantation, and roughly designated as Voodooism.
Association with the masters, missionary effort and motives of
expediency gave these rites an early veneer of Christianity, and after
the lapse of many generations the Negro church became Christian.

Two characteristic things must be noticed in regard to the church.
First, it became almost entirely Baptist and Methodist in faith;
secondly, as a social institution it antedated by many decades the
monogamic Negro home.  From the very circumstances of its beginning,
the church was confined to the plantation, and consisted primarily of a
series of disconnected units; although, later on, some freedom of
movement was allowed, still this geographical limitation was always
important and was one cause of the spread of the decentralized and
democratic Baptist faith among the slaves.  At the same time, the
visible rite of baptism appealed strongly to their mystic temperament.
To-day the Baptist Church is still largest in membership among Negroes,
and has a million and a half communicants.  Next in popularity came the
churches organized in connection with the white neighboring churches,
chiefly Baptist and Methodist, with a few Episcopalian and others.  The
Methodists still form the second greatest denomination, with nearly a
million members.  The faith of these two leading denominations was more
suited to the slave church from the prominence they gave to religious
feeling and fervor.  The Negro membership in other denominations has
always been small and relatively unimportant, although the
Episcopalians and Presbyterians are gaining among the more intelligent
classes to-day, and the Catholic Church is making headway in certain
sections.  After Emancipation, and still earlier in the North, the
Negro churches largely severed such affiliations as they had had with
the white churches, either by choice or by compulsion.  The Baptist
churches became independent, but the Methodists were compelled early to
unite for purposes of episcopal government.  This gave rise to the
great African Methodist Church, the greatest Negro organization in the
world, to the Zion Church and the Colored Methodist, and to the black
conferences and churches in this and other denominations.

The second fact noted, namely, that the Negro church antedates the
Negro home, leads to an explanation of much that is paradoxical in this
communistic institution and in the morals of its members.  But
especially it leads us to regard this institution as peculiarly the
expression of the inner ethical life of a people in a sense seldom true
elsewhere.  Let us turn, then, from the outer physical development of
the church to the more important inner ethical life of the people who
compose it.  The Negro has already been pointed out many times as a
religious animal,--a being of that deep emotional nature which turns
instinctively toward the supernatural.  Endowed with a rich tropical
imagination and a keen, delicate appreciation of Nature, the
transplanted African lived in a world animate with gods and devils,
elves and witches; full of strange influences,--of Good to be implored,
of Evil to be propitiated.  Slavery, then, was to him the dark triumph
of Evil over him.  All the hateful powers of the Under-world were
striving against him, and a spirit of revolt and revenge filled his
heart.  He called up all the resources of heathenism to aid,--exorcism
and witch-craft, the mysterious Obi worship with its barbarious rites,
spells, and blood-sacrifice even, now and then, of human victims.
Weird midnight orgies and mystic conjurations were invoked, the
witch-woman and the voodoo-priest became the centre of Negro group
life, and that vein of vague superstition which characterizes the
unlettered Negro even to-day was deepened and strengthened.

In spite, however, of such success as that of the fierce Maroons, the
Danish blacks, and others, the spirit of revolt gradually died away
under the untiring energy and superior strength of the slave masters.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the black slave had sunk, with
hushed murmurs, to his place at the bottom of a new economic system,
and was unconsciously ripe for a new philosophy of life.  Nothing
suited his condition then better than the doctrines of passive
submission embodied in the newly learned Christianity.  Slave masters
early realized this, and cheerfully aided religious propaganda within
certain bounds.  The long system of repression and degradation of the
Negro tended to emphasize the elements of his character which made him
a valuable chattel: courtesy became humility, moral strength
degenerated into submission, and the exquisite native appreciation of
the beautiful became an infinite capacity for dumb suffering.  The
Negro, losing the joy of this world, eagerly seized upon the offered
conceptions of the next; the avenging Spirit of the Lord enjoining
patience in this world, under sorrow and tribulation until the Great
Day when He should lead His dark children home,--this became his
comforting dream.  His preacher repeated the prophecy, and his bards
sang,--

  "Children, we all shall be free
  When the Lord shall appear!"


This deep religious fatalism, painted so beautifully in "Uncle Tom,"
came soon to breed, as all fatalistic faiths will, the sensualist side
by side with the martyr.  Under the lax moral life of the plantation,
where marriage was a farce, laziness a virtue, and property a theft, a
religion of resignation and submission degenerated easily, in less
strenuous minds, into a philosophy of indulgence and crime.  Many of
the worst characteristics of the Negro masses of to-day had their seed
in this period of the slave's ethical growth.  Here it was that the
Home was ruined under the very shadow of the Church, white and black;
here habits of shiftlessness took root, and sullen hopelessness
replaced hopeful strife.

With the beginning of the abolition movement and the gradual growth of
a class of free Negroes came a change.  We often neglect the influence
of the freedman before the war, because of the paucity of his numbers
and the small weight he had in the history of the nation.  But we must
not forget that his chief influence was internal,--was exerted on the
black world; and that there he was the ethical and social leader.
Huddled as he was in a few centres like Philadelphia, New York, and New
Orleans, the masses of the freedmen sank into poverty and listlessness;
but not all of them.  The free Negro leader early arose and his chief
characteristic was intense earnestness and deep feeling on the slavery
question.  Freedom became to him a real thing and not a dream.  His
religion became darker and more intense, and into his ethics crept a
note of revenge, into his songs a day of reckoning close at hand.  The
"Coming of the Lord" swept this side of Death, and came to be a thing
to be hoped for in this day.  Through fugitive slaves and irrepressible
discussion this desire for freedom seized the black millions still in
bondage, and became their one ideal of life.  The black bards caught
new notes, and sometimes even dared to sing,--

  "O Freedom, O Freedom, O Freedom over me!
  Before I'll be a slave
  I'll be buried in my grave,
  And go home to my Lord
  And be free."


For fifty years Negro religion thus transformed itself and identified
itself with the dream of Abolition, until that which was a radical fad
in the white North and an anarchistic plot in the white South had
become a religion to the black world.  Thus, when Emancipation finally
came, it seemed to the freedman a literal Coming of the Lord.  His
fervid imagination was stirred as never before, by the tramp of armies,
the blood and dust of battle, and the wail and whirl of social
upheaval.  He stood dumb and motionless before the whirlwind: what had
he to do with it?  Was it not the Lord's doing, and marvellous in his
eyes?  Joyed and bewildered with what came, he stood awaiting new
wonders till the inevitable Age of Reaction swept over the nation and
brought the crisis of to-day.

It is difficult to explain clearly the present critical stage of Negro
religion.  First, we must remember that living as the blacks do in
close contact with a great modern nation, and sharing, although
imperfectly, the soul-life of that nation, they must necessarily be
affected more or less directly by all the religious and ethical forces
that are to-day moving the United States.  These questions and
movements are, however, overshadowed and dwarfed by the (to them)
all-important question of their civil, political, and economic status.
They must perpetually discuss the "Negro Problem,"--must live, move,
and have their being in it, and interpret all else in its light or
darkness.  With this come, too, peculiar problems of their inner
life,--of the status of women, the maintenance of Home, the training of
children, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevention of crime.  All
this must mean a time of intense ethical ferment, of religious
heart-searching and intellectual unrest.  From the double life every
American Negro must live, as a Negro and as an American, as swept on by
the current of the nineteenth while yet struggling in the eddies of the
fifteenth century,--from this must arise a painful self-consciousness,
an almost morbid sense of personality and a moral hesitancy which is
fatal to self-confidence.  The worlds within and without the Veil of
Color are changing, and changing rapidly, but not at the same rate, not
in the same way; and this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the
soul, a peculiar sense of doubt and bewilderment.  Such a double life,
with double thoughts, double duties, and double social classes, must
give rise to double words and double ideals, and tempt the mind to
pretence or revolt, to hypocrisy or radicalism.

In some such doubtful words and phrases can one perhaps most clearly
picture the peculiar ethical paradox that faces the Negro of to-day and
is tingeing and changing his religious life.  Feeling that his rights
and his dearest ideals are being trampled upon, that the public
conscience is ever more deaf to his righteous appeal, and that all the
reactionary forces of prejudice, greed, and revenge are daily gaining
new strength and fresh allies, the Negro faces no enviable dilemma.
Conscious of his impotence, and pessimistic, he often becomes bitter
and vindictive; and his religion, instead of a worship, is a complaint
and a curse, a wail rather than a hope, a sneer rather than a faith.
On the other hand, another type of mind, shrewder and keener and more
tortuous too, sees in the very strength of the anti-Negro movement its
patent weaknesses, and with Jesuitic casuistry is deterred by no
ethical considerations in the endeavor to turn this weakness to the
black man's strength.  Thus we have two great and hardly reconcilable
streams of thought and ethical strivings; the danger of the one lies in
anarchy, that of the other in hypocrisy.  The one type of Negro stands
almost ready to curse God and die, and the other is too often found a
traitor to right and a coward before force; the one is wedded to ideals
remote, whimsical, perhaps impossible of realization; the other forgets
that life is more than meat and the body more than raiment.  But, after
all, is not this simply the writhing of the age translated into
black,--the triumph of the Lie which today, with its false culture,
faces the hideousness of the anarchist assassin?

To-day the two groups of Negroes, the one in the North, the other in
the South, represent these divergent ethical tendencies, the first
tending toward radicalism, the other toward hypocritical compromise.
It is no idle regret with which the white South mourns the loss of the
old-time Negro,--the frank, honest, simple old servant who stood for
the earlier religious age of submission and humility.  With all his
laziness and lack of many elements of true manhood, he was at least
open-hearted, faithful, and sincere.  To-day he is gone, but who is to
blame for his going?  Is it not those very persons who mourn for him?
Is it not the tendency, born of Reconstruction and Reaction, to found a
society on lawlessness and deception, to tamper with the moral fibre of
a naturally honest and straightforward people until the whites threaten
to become ungovernable tyrants and the blacks criminals and hypocrites?
Deception is the natural defence of the weak against the strong, and
the South used it for many years against its conquerors; to-day it must
be prepared to see its black proletariat turn that same two-edged
weapon against itself.  And how natural this is!  The death of Denmark
Vesey and Nat Turner proved long since to the Negro the present
hopelessness of physical defence.  Political defence is becoming less
and less available, and economic defence is still only partially
effective.  But there is a patent defence at hand,--the defence of
deception and flattery, of cajoling and lying.  It is the same defence
which peasants of the Middle Age used and which left its stamp on their
character for centuries.  To-day the young Negro of the South who would
succeed cannot be frank and outspoken, honest and self-assertive, but
rather he is daily tempted to be silent and wary, politic and sly; he
must flatter and be pleasant, endure petty insults with a smile, shut
his eyes to wrong; in too many cases he sees positive personal
advantage in deception and lying.  His real thoughts, his real
aspirations, must be guarded in whispers; he must not criticise, he
must not complain.  Patience, humility, and adroitness must, in these
growing black youth, replace impulse, manliness, and courage.  With
this sacrifice there is an economic opening, and perhaps peace and some
prosperity.  Without this there is riot, migration, or crime.  Nor is
this situation peculiar to the Southern United States, is it not rather
the only method by which undeveloped races have gained the right to
share modern culture?  The price of culture is a Lie.

On the other hand, in the North the tendency is to emphasize the
radicalism of the Negro.  Driven from his birthright in the South by a
situation at which every fibre of his more outspoken and assertive
nature revolts, he finds himself in a land where he can scarcely earn a
decent living amid the harsh competition and the color discrimination.
At the same time, through schools and periodicals, discussions and
lectures, he is intellectually quickened and awakened.  The soul, long
pent up and dwarfed, suddenly expands in new-found freedom.  What
wonder that every tendency is to excess,--radical complaint, radical
remedies, bitter denunciation or angry silence.  Some sink, some rise.
The criminal and the sensualist leave the church for the gambling-hell
and the brothel, and fill the slums of Chicago and Baltimore; the
better classes segregate themselves from the group-life of both white
and black, and form an aristocracy, cultured but pessimistic, whose
bitter criticism stings while it points out no way of escape.  They
despise the submission and subserviency of the Southern Negroes, but
offer no other means by which a poor and oppressed minority can exist
side by side with its masters.  Feeling deeply and keenly the
tendencies and opportunities of the age in which they live, their souls
are bitter at the fate which drops the Veil between; and the very fact
that this bitterness is natural and justifiable only serves to
intensify it and make it more maddening.

Between the two extreme types of ethical attitude which I have thus
sought to make clear wavers the mass of the millions of Negroes, North
and South; and their religious life and activity partake of this social
conflict within their ranks.  Their churches are differentiating,--now
into groups of cold, fashionable devotees, in no way distinguishable
from similar white groups save in color of skin; now into large social
and business institutions catering to the desire for information and
amusement of their members, warily avoiding unpleasant questions both
within and without the black world, and preaching in effect if not in
word: Dum vivimus, vivamus.

But back of this still broods silently the deep religious feeling of
the real Negro heart, the stirring, unguided might of powerful human
souls who have lost the guiding star of the past and seek in the great
night a new religious ideal.  Some day the Awakening will come, when
the pent-up vigor of ten million souls shall sweep irresistibly toward
the Goal, out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where all that
makes life worth living--Liberty, Justice, and Right--is marked "For
White People Only."




XI

Of the Passing of the First-Born

  O sister, sister, thy first-begotten,
  The hands that cling and the feet that follow,
  The voice of the child's blood crying yet,
  WHO HATH REMEMBERED ME?  WHO HATH FORGOTTEN?
  Thou hast forgotten, O summer swallow,
  But the world shall end when I forget.

  SWINBURNE.


"Unto you a child is born," sang the bit of yellow paper that fluttered
into my room one brown October morning.  Then the fear of fatherhood
mingled wildly with the joy of creation; I wondered how it looked and
how it felt--what were its eyes, and how its hair curled and crumpled
itself.  And I thought in awe of her,--she who had slept with Death to
tear a man-child from underneath her heart, while I was unconsciously
wandering.  I fled to my wife and child, repeating the while to myself
half wonderingly, "Wife and child?  Wife and child?"--fled fast and
faster than boat and steam-car, and yet must ever impatiently await
them; away from the hard-voiced city, away from the flickering sea into
my own Berkshire Hills that sit all sadly guarding the gates of
Massachusetts.

Up the stairs I ran to the wan mother and whimpering babe, to the
sanctuary on whose altar a life at my bidding had offered itself to win
a life, and won.  What is this tiny formless thing, this newborn wail
from an unknown world,--all head and voice?  I handle it curiously, and
watch perplexed its winking, breathing, and sneezing.  I did not love
it then; it seemed a ludicrous thing to love; but her I loved, my
girl-mother, she whom now I saw unfolding like the glory of the
morning--the transfigured woman.  Through her I came to love the wee
thing, as it grew strong; as its little soul unfolded itself in twitter
and cry and half-formed word, and as its eyes caught the gleam and
flash of life.  How beautiful he was, with his olive-tinted flesh and
dark gold ringlets, his eyes of mingled blue and brown, his perfect
little limbs, and the soft voluptuous roll which the blood of Africa
had moulded into his features!  I held him in my arms, after we had
sped far away from our Southern home,--held him, and glanced at the hot
red soil of Georgia and the breathless city of a hundred hills, and
felt a vague unrest.  Why was his hair tinted with gold?  An evil omen
was golden hair in my life.  Why had not the brown of his eyes crushed
out and killed the blue?--for brown were his father's eyes, and his
father's father's.  And thus in the Land of the Color-line I saw, as it
fell across my baby, the shadow of the Veil.

Within the Veil was he born, said I; and there within shall he live,--a
Negro and a Negro's son.  Holding in that little head--ah,
bitterly!--he unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny
dimpled hand--ah, wearily!--to a hope not hopeless but unhopeful, and
seeing with those bright wondering eyes that peer into my soul a land
whose freedom is to us a mockery and whose liberty a lie.  I saw the
shadow of the Veil as it passed over my baby, I saw the cold city
towering above the blood-red land.  I held my face beside his little
cheek, showed him the star-children and the twinkling lights as they
began to flash, and stilled with an even-song the unvoiced terror of my
life.

So sturdy and masterful he grew, so filled with bubbling life, so
tremulous with the unspoken wisdom of a life but eighteen months
distant from the All-life,--we were not far from worshipping this
revelation of the divine, my wife and I. Her own life builded and
moulded itself upon the child; he tinged her every dream and idealized
her every effort.  No hands but hers must touch and garnish those
little limbs; no dress or frill must touch them that had not wearied
her fingers; no voice but hers could coax him off to Dreamland, and she
and he together spoke some soft and unknown tongue and in it held
communion.  I too mused above his little white bed; saw the strength of
my own arm stretched onward through the ages through the newer strength
of his; saw the dream of my black fathers stagger a step onward in the
wild phantasm of the world; heard in his baby voice the voice of the
Prophet that was to rise within the Veil.

And so we dreamed and loved and planned by fall and winter, and the
full flush of the long Southern spring, till the hot winds rolled from
the fetid Gulf, till the roses shivered and the still stern sun
quivered its awful light over the hills of Atlanta.  And then one night
the little feet pattered wearily to the wee white bed, and the tiny
hands trembled; and a warm flushed face tossed on the pillow, and we
knew baby was sick.  Ten days he lay there,--a swift week and three
endless days, wasting, wasting away.  Cheerily the mother nursed him
the first days, and laughed into the little eyes that smiled again.
Tenderly then she hovered round him, till the smile fled away and Fear
crouched beside the little bed.

Then the day ended not, and night was a dreamless terror, and joy and
sleep slipped away.  I hear now that Voice at midnight calling me from
dull and dreamless trance,--crying, "The Shadow of Death!  The Shadow
of Death!"  Out into the starlight I crept, to rouse the gray
physician,--the Shadow of Death, the Shadow of Death.  The hours
trembled on; the night listened; the ghastly dawn glided like a tired
thing across the lamplight.  Then we two alone looked upon the child as
he turned toward us with great eyes, and stretched his stringlike
hands,--the Shadow of Death!  And we spoke no word, and turned away.

He died at eventide, when the sun lay like a brooding sorrow above the
western hills, veiling its face; when the winds spoke not, and the
trees, the great green trees he loved, stood motionless.  I saw his
breath beat quicker and quicker, pause, and then his little soul leapt
like a star that travels in the night and left a world of darkness in
its train.  The day changed not; the same tall trees peeped in at the
windows, the same green grass glinted in the setting sun.  Only in the
chamber of death writhed the world's most piteous thing--a childless
mother.

I shirk not.  I long for work.  I pant for a life full of striving.  I
am no coward, to shrink before the rugged rush of the storm, nor even
quail before the awful shadow of the Veil.  But hearken, O Death!  Is
not this my life hard enough,--is not that dull land that stretches its
sneering web about me cold enough,--is not all the world beyond these
four little walls pitiless enough, but that thou must needs enter
here,--thou, O Death?  About my head the thundering storm beat like a
heartless voice, and the crazy forest pulsed with the curses of the
weak; but what cared I, within my home beside my wife and baby boy?
Wast thou so jealous of one little coign of happiness that thou must
needs enter there,--thou, O Death?

A perfect life was his, all joy and love, with tears to make it
brighter,--sweet as a summer's day beside the Housatonic.  The world
loved him; the women kissed his curls, the men looked gravely into his
wonderful eyes, and the children hovered and fluttered about him.  I
can see him now, changing like the sky from sparkling laughter to
darkening frowns, and then to wondering thoughtfulness as he watched
the world.  He knew no color-line, poor dear--and the Veil, though it
shadowed him, had not yet darkened half his sun.  He loved the white
matron, he loved his black nurse; and in his little world walked souls
alone, uncolored and unclothed.  I--yea, all men--are larger and purer
by the infinite breadth of that one little life.  She who in simple
clearness of vision sees beyond the stars said when he had flown, "He
will be happy There; he ever loved beautiful things."  And I, far more
ignorant, and blind by the web of mine own weaving, sit alone winding
words and muttering, "If still he be, and he be There, and there be a
There, let him be happy, O Fate!"

Blithe was the morning of his burial, with bird and song and
sweet-smelling flowers.  The trees whispered to the grass, but the
children sat with hushed faces.  And yet it seemed a ghostly unreal
day,--the wraith of Life.  We seemed to rumble down an unknown street
behind a little white bundle of posies, with the shadow of a song in
our ears.  The busy city dinned about us; they did not say much, those
pale-faced hurrying men and women; they did not say much,--they only
glanced and said, "Niggers!"

We could not lay him in the ground there in Georgia, for the earth
there is strangely red; so we bore him away to the northward, with his
flowers and his little folded hands.  In vain, in vain!--for where, O
God!  beneath thy broad blue sky shall my dark baby rest in
peace,--where Reverence dwells, and Goodness, and a Freedom that is
free?

All that day and all that night there sat an awful gladness in my
heart,--nay, blame me not if I see the world thus darkly through the
Veil,--and my soul whispers ever to me saying, "Not dead, not dead, but
escaped; not bond, but free."  No bitter meanness now shall sicken his
baby heart till it die a living death, no taunt shall madden his happy
boyhood.  Fool that I was to think or wish that this little soul should
grow choked and deformed within the Veil!  I might have known that
yonder deep unworldly look that ever and anon floated past his eyes was
peering far beyond this narrow Now.  In the poise of his little
curl-crowned head did there not sit all that wild pride of being which
his father had hardly crushed in his own heart?  For what, forsooth,
shall a Negro want with pride amid the studied humiliations of fifty
million fellows?  Well sped, my boy, before the world had dubbed your
ambition insolence, had held your ideals unattainable, and taught you
to cringe and bow.  Better far this nameless void that stops my life
than a sea of sorrow for you.

Idle words; he might have borne his burden more bravely than we,--aye,
and found it lighter too, some day; for surely, surely this is not the
end.  Surely there shall yet dawn some mighty morning to lift the Veil
and set the prisoned free.  Not for me,--I shall die in my bonds,--but
for fresh young souls who have not known the night and waken to the
morning; a morning when men ask of the workman, not "Is he white?" but
"Can he work?"  When men ask artists, not "Are they black?" but "Do
they know?"  Some morning this may be, long, long years to come.  But
now there wails, on that dark shore within the Veil, the same deep
voice, THOU SHALT FOREGO!  And all have I foregone at that command, and
with small complaint,--all save that fair young form that lies so
coldly wed with death in the nest I had builded.

If one must have gone, why not I?  Why may I not rest me from this
restlessness and sleep from this wide waking?  Was not the world's
alembic, Time, in his young hands, and is not my time waning?  Are
there so many workers in the vineyard that the fair promise of this
little body could lightly be tossed away?  The wretched of my race that
line the alleys of the nation sit fatherless and unmothered; but Love
sat beside his cradle, and in his ear Wisdom waited to speak.  Perhaps
now he knows the All-love, and needs not to be wise.  Sleep, then,
child,--sleep till I sleep and waken to a baby voice and the ceaseless
patter of little feet--above the Veil.




XII

Of Alexander Crummell

  Then from the Dawn it seemed there came, but faint
  As from beyond the limit of the world,
  Like the last echo born of a great cry,
  Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice
  Around a king returning from his wars.

  TENNYSON.


This is the story of a human heart,--the tale of a black boy who many
long years ago began to struggle with life that he might know the world
and know himself.  Three temptations he met on those dark dunes that
lay gray and dismal before the wonder-eyes of the child: the temptation
of Hate, that stood out against the red dawn; the temptation of
Despair, that darkened noonday; and the temptation of Doubt, that ever
steals along with twilight.  Above all, you must hear of the vales he
crossed,--the Valley of Humiliation and the Valley of the Shadow of
Death.

I saw Alexander Crummell first at a Wilberforce commencement season,
amid its bustle and crush.  Tall, frail, and black he stood, with
simple dignity and an unmistakable air of good breeding.  I talked with
him apart, where the storming of the lusty young orators could not harm
us.  I spoke to him politely, then curiously, then eagerly, as I began
to feel the fineness of his character,--his calm courtesy, the
sweetness of his strength, and his fair blending of the hope and truth
of life.  Instinctively I bowed before this man, as one bows before the
prophets of the world.  Some seer he seemed, that came not from the
crimson Past or the gray To-come, but from the pulsing Now,--that
mocking world which seemed to me at once so light and dark, so splendid
and sordid.  Fourscore years had he wandered in this same world of
mine, within the Veil.

He was born with the Missouri Compromise and lay a-dying amid the
echoes of Manila and El Caney: stirring times for living, times dark to
look back upon, darker to look forward to. The black-faced lad that
paused over his mud and marbles seventy years ago saw puzzling vistas
as he looked down the world.  The slave-ship still groaned across the
Atlantic, faint cries burdened the Southern breeze, and the great black
father whispered mad tales of cruelty into those young ears.  From the
low doorway the mother silently watched her boy at play, and at
nightfall sought him eagerly lest the shadows bear him away to the land
of slaves.

So his young mind worked and winced and shaped curiously a vision of
Life; and in the midst of that vision ever stood one dark figure
alone,--ever with the hard, thick countenance of that bitter father,
and a form that fell in vast and shapeless folds.  Thus the temptation
of Hate grew and shadowed the growing child,--gliding stealthily into
his laughter, fading into his play, and seizing his dreams by day and
night with rough, rude turbulence.  So the black boy asked of sky and
sun and flower the never-answered Why? and loved, as he grew, neither
the world nor the world's rough ways.

Strange temptation for a child, you may think; and yet in this wide
land to-day a thousand thousand dark children brood before this same
temptation, and feel its cold and shuddering arms.  For them, perhaps,
some one will some day lift the Veil,--will come tenderly and cheerily
into those sad little lives and brush the brooding hate away, just as
Beriah Green strode in upon the life of Alexander Crummell.  And before
the bluff, kind-hearted man the shadow seemed less dark.  Beriah Green
had a school in Oneida County, New York, with a score of mischievous
boys.  "I'm going to bring a black boy here to educate," said Beriah
Green, as only a crank and an abolitionist would have dared to say.
"Oho!" laughed the boys.  "Ye-es," said his wife; and Alexander came.
Once before, the black boy had sought a school, had travelled, cold and
hungry, four hundred miles up into free New Hampshire, to Canaan.  But
the godly farmers hitched ninety yoke of oxen to the abolition
schoolhouse and dragged it into the middle of the swamp.  The black boy
trudged away.

The nineteenth was the first century of human sympathy,--the age when
half wonderingly we began to descry in others that transfigured spark
of divinity which we call Myself; when clodhoppers and peasants, and
tramps and thieves, and millionaires and--sometimes--Negroes, became
throbbing souls whose warm pulsing life touched us so nearly that we
half gasped with surprise, crying, "Thou too!  Hast Thou seen Sorrow
and the dull waters of Hopelessness?  Hast Thou known Life?"  And then
all helplessly we peered into those Other-worlds, and wailed, "O World
of Worlds, how shall man make you one?"

So in that little Oneida school there came to those schoolboys a
revelation of thought and longing beneath one black skin, of which they
had not dreamed before.  And to the lonely boy came a new dawn of
sympathy and inspiration.  The shadowy, formless thing--the temptation
of Hate, that hovered between him and the world--grew fainter and less
sinister.  It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and
lingered thick at the edges.  Through it the child now first saw the
blue and gold of life,--the sun-swept road that ran 'twixt heaven and
earth until in one far-off wan wavering line they met and kissed.  A
vision of life came to the growing boy,--mystic, wonderful.  He raised
his head, stretched himself, breathed deep of the fresh new air.
Yonder, behind the forests, he heard strange sounds; then glinting
through the trees he saw, far, far away, the bronzed hosts of a nation
calling,--calling faintly, calling loudly.  He heard the hateful clank
of their chains; he felt them cringe and grovel, and there rose within
him a protest and a prophecy.  And he girded himself to walk down the
world.

A voice and vision called him to be a priest,--a seer to lead the
uncalled out of the house of bondage.  He saw the headless host turn
toward him like the whirling of mad waters,--he stretched forth his
hands eagerly, and then, even as he stretched them, suddenly there
swept across the vision the temptation of Despair.

They were not wicked men,--the problem of life is not the problem of
the wicked,--they were calm, good men, Bishops of the Apostolic Church
of God, and strove toward righteousness.  They said slowly, "It is all
very natural--it is even commendable; but the General Theological
Seminary of the Episcopal Church cannot admit a Negro."  And when that
thin, half-grotesque figure still haunted their doors, they put their
hands kindly, half sorrowfully, on his shoulders, and said, "Now,--of
course, we--we know how YOU feel about it; but you see it is
impossible,--that is--well--it is premature.  Sometime, we
trust--sincerely trust--all such distinctions will fade away; but now
the world is as it is."

This was the temptation of Despair; and the young man fought it
doggedly.  Like some grave shadow he flitted by those halls, pleading,
arguing, half angrily demanding admittance, until there came the final
NO: until men hustled the disturber away, marked him as foolish,
unreasonable, and injudicious, a vain rebel against God's law.  And
then from that Vision Splendid all the glory faded slowly away, and
left an earth gray and stern rolling on beneath a dark despair.  Even
the kind hands that stretched themselves toward him from out the depths
of that dull morning seemed but parts of the purple shadows.  He saw
them coldly, and asked, "Why should I strive by special grace when the
way of the world is closed to me?"  All gently yet, the hands urged him
on,--the hands of young John Jay, that daring father's daring son; the
hands of the good folk of Boston, that free city.  And yet, with a way
to the priesthood of the Church open at last before him, the cloud
lingered there; and even when in old St. Paul's the venerable Bishop
raised his white arms above the Negro deacon--even then the burden had
not lifted from that heart, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

And yet the fire through which Alexander Crummell went did not burn in
vain.  Slowly and more soberly he took up again his plan of life.  More
critically he studied the situation.  Deep down below the slavery and
servitude of the Negro people he saw their fatal weaknesses, which long
years of mistreatment had emphasized.  The dearth of strong moral
character, of unbending righteousness, he felt, was their great
shortcoming, and here he would begin.  He would gather the best of his
people into some little Episcopal chapel and there lead, teach, and
inspire them, till the leaven spread, till the children grew, till the
world hearkened, till--till--and then across his dream gleamed some
faint after-glow of that first fair vision of youth--only an
after-glow, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

One day--it was in 1842, and the springtide was struggling merrily with
the May winds of New England--he stood at last in his own chapel in
Providence, a priest of the Church.  The days sped by, and the dark
young clergyman labored; he wrote his sermons carefully; he intoned his
prayers with a soft, earnest voice; he haunted the streets and accosted
the wayfarers; he visited the sick, and knelt beside the dying.  He
worked and toiled, week by week, day by day, month by month.  And yet
month by month the congregation dwindled, week by week the hollow walls
echoed more sharply, day by day the calls came fewer and fewer, and day
by day the third temptation sat clearer and still more clearly within
the Veil; a temptation, as it were, bland and smiling, with just a
shade of mockery in its smooth tones.  First it came casually, in the
cadence of a voice: "Oh, colored folks?  Yes."  Or perhaps more
definitely: "What do you EXPECT?"  In voice and gesture lay the
doubt--the temptation of Doubt.  How he hated it, and stormed at it
furiously!  "Of course they are capable," he cried; "of course they can
learn and strive and achieve--" and "Of course," added the temptation
softly, "they do nothing of the sort."  Of all the three temptations,
this one struck the deepest.  Hate?  He had outgrown so childish a
thing.  Despair?  He had steeled his right arm against it, and fought
it with the vigor of determination.  But to doubt the worth of his
life-work,--to doubt the destiny and capability of the race his soul
loved because it was his; to find listless squalor instead of eager
endeavor; to hear his own lips whispering, "They do not care; they
cannot know; they are dumb driven cattle,--why cast your pearls before
swine?"--this, this seemed more than man could bear; and he closed the
door, and sank upon the steps of the chancel, and cast his robe upon
the floor and writhed.

The evening sunbeams had set the dust to dancing in the gloomy chapel
when he arose.  He folded his vestments, put away the hymn-books, and
closed the great Bible.  He stepped out into the twilight, looked back
upon the narrow little pulpit with a weary smile, and locked the door.
Then he walked briskly to the Bishop, and told the Bishop what the
Bishop already knew.  "I have failed," he said simply.  And gaining
courage by the confession, he added: "What I need is a larger
constituency.  There are comparatively few Negroes here, and perhaps
they are not of the best.  I must go where the field is wider, and try
again."  So the Bishop sent him to Philadelphia, with a letter to
Bishop Onderdonk.

Bishop Onderdonk lived at the head of six white steps,--corpulent,
red-faced, and the author of several thrilling tracts on Apostolic
Succession.  It was after dinner, and the Bishop had settled himself
for a pleasant season of contemplation, when the bell must needs ring,
and there must burst in upon the Bishop a letter and a thin, ungainly
Negro.  Bishop Onderdonk read the letter hastily and frowned.
Fortunately, his mind was already clear on this point; and he cleared
his brow and looked at Crummell.  Then he said, slowly and
impressively: "I will receive you into this diocese on one condition:
no Negro priest can sit in my church convention, and no Negro church
must ask for representation there."

I sometimes fancy I can see that tableau: the frail black figure,
nervously twitching his hat before the massive abdomen of Bishop
Onderdonk; his threadbare coat thrown against the dark woodwork of the
bookcases, where Fox's "Lives of the Martyrs" nestled happily beside
"The Whole Duty of Man."  I seem to see the wide eyes of the Negro
wander past the Bishop's broadcloth to where the swinging glass doors
of the cabinet glow in the sunlight.  A little blue fly is trying to
cross the yawning keyhole.  He marches briskly up to it, peers into the
chasm in a surprised sort of way, and rubs his feelers reflectively;
then he essays its depths, and, finding it bottomless, draws back
again.  The dark-faced priest finds himself wondering if the fly too
has faced its Valley of Humiliation, and if it will plunge into
it,--when lo! it spreads its tiny wings and buzzes merrily across,
leaving the watcher wingless and alone.

Then the full weight of his burden fell upon him.  The rich walls
wheeled away, and before him lay the cold rough moor winding on through
life, cut in twain by one thick granite ridge,--here, the Valley of
Humiliation; yonder, the Valley of the Shadow of Death.  And I know not
which be darker,--no, not I. But this I know: in yonder Vale of the
Humble stand to-day a million swarthy men, who willingly would

  ". . . bear the whips and scorns of time,
  The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
  The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
  The insolence of office, and the spurns
  That patient merit of the unworthy takes,"--

all this and more would they bear did they but know that this were
sacrifice and not a meaner thing.  So surged the thought within that
lone black breast.  The Bishop cleared his throat suggestively; then,
recollecting that there was really nothing to say, considerately said
nothing, only sat tapping his foot impatiently.  But Alexander Crummell
said, slowly and heavily: "I will never enter your diocese on such
terms."  And saying this, he turned and passed into the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.  You might have noted only the physical dying, the
shattered frame and hacking cough; but in that soul lay deeper death
than that.  He found a chapel in New York,--the church of his father;
he labored for it in poverty and starvation, scorned by his fellow
priests.  Half in despair, he wandered across the sea, a beggar with
outstretched hands.  Englishmen clasped them,--Wilberforce and Stanley,
Thirwell and Ingles, and even Froude and Macaulay; Sir Benjamin Brodie
bade him rest awhile at Queen's College in Cambridge, and there he
lingered, struggling for health of body and mind, until he took his
degree in '53.  Restless still, and unsatisfied, he turned toward
Africa, and for long years, amid the spawn of the slave-smugglers,
sought a new heaven and a new earth.

So the man groped for light; all this was not Life,--it was the
world-wandering of a soul in search of itself, the striving of one who
vainly sought his place in the world, ever haunted by the shadow of a
death that is more than death,--the passing of a soul that has missed
its duty.  Twenty years he wandered,--twenty years and more; and yet
the hard rasping question kept gnawing within him, "What, in God's
name, am I on earth for?"  In the narrow New York parish his soul
seemed cramped and smothered.  In the fine old air of the English
University he heard the millions wailing over the sea.  In the wild
fever-cursed swamps of West Africa he stood helpless and alone.

You will not wonder at his weird pilgrimage,--you who in the swift
whirl of living, amid its cold paradox and marvellous vision, have
fronted life and asked its riddle face to face.  And if you find that
riddle hard to read, remember that yonder black boy finds it just a
little harder; if it is difficult for you to find and face your duty,
it is a shade more difficult for him; if your heart sickens in the
blood and dust of battle, remember that to him the dust is thicker and
the battle fiercer.  No wonder the wanderers fall!  No wonder we point
to thief and murderer, and haunting prostitute, and the never-ending
throng of unhearsed dead!  The Valley of the Shadow of Death gives few
of its pilgrims back to the world.

But Alexander Crummell it gave back.  Out of the temptation of Hate,
and burned by the fire of Despair, triumphant over Doubt, and steeled
by Sacrifice against Humiliation, he turned at last home across the
waters, humble and strong, gentle and determined.  He bent to all the
gibes and prejudices, to all hatred and discrimination, with that rare
courtesy which is the armor of pure souls.  He fought among his own,
the low, the grasping, and the wicked, with that unbending
righteousness which is the sword of the just.  He never faltered, he
seldom complained; he simply worked, inspiring the young, rebuking the
old, helping the weak, guiding the strong.

So he grew, and brought within his wide influence all that was best of
those who walk within the Veil.  They who live without knew not nor
dreamed of that full power within, that mighty inspiration which the
dull gauze of caste decreed that most men should not know.  And now
that he is gone, I sweep the Veil away and cry, Lo! the soul to whose
dear memory I bring this little tribute.  I can see his face still,
dark and heavy-lined beneath his snowy hair; lighting and shading, now
with inspiration for the future, now in innocent pain at some human
wickedness, now with sorrow at some hard memory from the past.  The
more I met Alexander Crummell, the more I felt how much that world was
losing which knew so little of him.  In another age he might have sat
among the elders of the land in purple-bordered toga; in another
country mothers might have sung him to the cradles.

He did his work,--he did it nobly and well; and yet I sorrow that here
he worked alone, with so little human sympathy.  His name to-day, in
this broad land, means little, and comes to fifty million ears laden
with no incense of memory or emulation.  And herein lies the tragedy of
the age: not that men are poor,--all men know something of poverty; not
that men are wicked,--who is good? not that men are ignorant,--what is
Truth?  Nay, but that men know so little of men.


He sat one morning gazing toward the sea.  He smiled and said, "The
gate is rusty on the hinges."  That night at starrise a wind came
moaning out of the west to blow the gate ajar, and then the soul I
loved fled like a flame across the Seas, and in its seat sat Death.

I wonder where he is to-day?  I wonder if in that dim world beyond, as
he came gliding in, there rose on some wan throne a King,--a dark and
pierced Jew, who knows the writhings of the earthly damned, saying, as
he laid those heart-wrung talents down, "Well done!" while round about
the morning stars sat singing.




XIII

Of the Coming of John

  What bring they 'neath the midnight,
    Beside the River-sea?
  They bring the human heart wherein
    No nightly calm can be;
  That droppeth never with the wind,
    Nor drieth with the dew;
  O calm it, God; thy calm is broad
    To cover spirits too.

   The river floweth on.

  MRS. BROWNING.


Carlisle Street runs westward from the centre of Johnstown, across a
great black bridge, down a hill and up again, by little shops and
meat-markets, past single-storied homes, until suddenly it stops
against a wide green lawn.  It is a broad, restful place, with two
large buildings outlined against the west.  When at evening the winds
come swelling from the east, and the great pall of the city's smoke
hangs wearily above the valley, then the red west glows like a
dreamland down Carlisle Street, and, at the tolling of the supper-bell,
throws the passing forms of students in dark silhouette against the
sky.  Tall and black, they move slowly by, and seem in the sinister
light to flit before the city like dim warning ghosts.  Perhaps they
are; for this is Wells Institute, and these black students have few
dealings with the white city below.

And if you will notice, night after night, there is one dark form that
ever hurries last and late toward the twinkling lights of Swain
Hall,--for Jones is never on time.  A long, straggling fellow he is,
brown and hard-haired, who seems to be growing straight out of his
clothes, and walks with a half-apologetic roll.  He used perpetually to
set the quiet dining-room into waves of merriment, as he stole to his
place after the bell had tapped for prayers; he seemed so perfectly
awkward.  And yet one glance at his face made one forgive him
much,--that broad, good-natured smile in which lay no bit of art or
artifice, but seemed just bubbling good-nature and genuine satisfaction
with the world.

He came to us from Altamaha, away down there beneath the gnarled oaks
of Southeastern Georgia, where the sea croons to the sands and the
sands listen till they sink half drowned beneath the waters, rising
only here and there in long, low islands.  The white folk of Altamaha
voted John a good boy,--fine plough-hand, good in the rice-fields,
handy everywhere, and always good-natured and respectful.  But they
shook their heads when his mother wanted to send him off to school.
"It'll spoil him,--ruin him," they said; and they talked as though they
knew.  But full half the black folk followed him proudly to the
station, and carried his queer little trunk and many bundles.  And
there they shook and shook hands, and the girls kissed him shyly and
the boys clapped him on the back.  So the train came, and he pinched
his little sister lovingly, and put his great arms about his mother's
neck, and then was away with a puff and a roar into the great yellow
world that flamed and flared about the doubtful pilgrim.  Up the coast
they hurried, past the squares and palmettos of Savannah, through the
cotton-fields and through the weary night, to Millville, and came with
the morning to the noise and bustle of Johnstown.

And they that stood behind, that morning in Altamaha, and watched the
train as it noisily bore playmate and brother and son away to the
world, had thereafter one ever-recurring word,--"When John comes." Then
what parties were to be, and what speakings in the churches; what new
furniture in the front room,--perhaps even a new front room; and there
would be a new schoolhouse, with John as teacher; and then perhaps a
big wedding; all this and more--when John comes.  But the white people
shook their heads.

At first he was coming at Christmas-time,--but the vacation proved too
short; and then, the next summer,--but times were hard and schooling
costly, and so, instead, he worked in Johnstown.  And so it drifted to
the next summer, and the next,--till playmates scattered, and mother
grew gray, and sister went up to the Judge's kitchen to work.  And
still the legend lingered,--"When John comes."

Up at the Judge's they rather liked this refrain; for they too had a
John--a fair-haired, smooth-faced boy, who had played many a long
summer's day to its close with his darker namesake.  "Yes, sir!  John
is at Princeton, sir," said the broad-shouldered gray-haired Judge
every morning as he marched down to the post-office.  "Showing the
Yankees what a Southern gentleman can do," he added; and strode home
again with his letters and papers.  Up at the great pillared house they
lingered long over the Princeton letter,--the Judge and his frail wife,
his sister and growing daughters.  "It'll make a man of him," said the
Judge, "college is the place."  And then he asked the shy little
waitress, "Well, Jennie, how's your John?" and added reflectively, "Too
bad, too bad your mother sent him off--it will spoil him."  And the
waitress wondered.

Thus in the far-away Southern village the world lay waiting, half
consciously, the coming of two young men, and dreamed in an
inarticulate way of new things that would be done and new thoughts that
all would think.  And yet it was singular that few thought of two
Johns,--for the black folk thought of one John, and he was black; and
the white folk thought of another John, and he was white.  And neither
world thought the other world's thought, save with a vague unrest.

Up in Johnstown, at the Institute, we were long puzzled at the case of
John Jones.  For a long time the clay seemed unfit for any sort of
moulding.  He was loud and boisterous, always laughing and singing, and
never able to work consecutively at anything.  He did not know how to
study; he had no idea of thoroughness; and with his tardiness,
carelessness, and appalling good-humor, we were sore perplexed.  One
night we sat in faculty-meeting, worried and serious; for Jones was in
trouble again.  This last escapade was too much, and so we solemnly
voted "that Jones, on account of repeated disorder and inattention to
work, be suspended for the rest of the term."

It seemed to us that the first time life ever struck Jones as a really
serious thing was when the Dean told him he must leave school.  He
stared at the gray-haired man blankly, with great eyes.  "Why,--why,"
he faltered, "but--I haven't graduated!"  Then the Dean slowly and
clearly explained, reminding him of the tardiness and the carelessness,
of the poor lessons and neglected work, of the noise and disorder,
until the fellow hung his head in confusion.  Then he said quickly,
"But you won't tell mammy and sister,--you won't write mammy, now will
you?  For if you won't I'll go out into the city and work, and come
back next term and show you something."  So the Dean promised
faithfully, and John shouldered his little trunk, giving neither word
nor look to the giggling boys, and walked down Carlisle Street to the
great city, with sober eyes and a set and serious face.

Perhaps we imagined it, but someway it seemed to us that the serious
look that crept over his boyish face that afternoon never left it
again.  When he came back to us he went to work with all his rugged
strength.  It was a hard struggle, for things did not come easily to
him,--few crowding memories of early life and teaching came to help him
on his new way; but all the world toward which he strove was of his own
building, and he builded slow and hard.  As the light dawned
lingeringly on his new creations, he sat rapt and silent before the
vision, or wandered alone over the green campus peering through and
beyond the world of men into a world of thought.  And the thoughts at
times puzzled him sorely; he could not see just why the circle was not
square, and carried it out fifty-six decimal places one
midnight,--would have gone further, indeed, had not the matron rapped
for lights out.  He caught terrible colds lying on his back in the
meadows of nights, trying to think out the solar system; he had grave
doubts as to the ethics of the Fall of Rome, and strongly suspected the
Germans of being thieves and rascals, despite his textbooks; he
pondered long over every new Greek word, and wondered why this meant
that and why it couldn't mean something else, and how it must have felt
to think all things in Greek.  So he thought and puzzled along for
himself,--pausing perplexed where others skipped merrily, and walking
steadily through the difficulties where the rest stopped and
surrendered.

Thus he grew in body and soul, and with him his clothes seemed to grow
and arrange themselves; coat sleeves got longer, cuffs appeared, and
collars got less soiled.  Now and then his boots shone, and a new
dignity crept into his walk.  And we who saw daily a new thoughtfulness
growing in his eyes began to expect something of this plodding boy.
Thus he passed out of the preparatory school into college, and we who
watched him felt four more years of change, which almost transformed
the tall, grave man who bowed to us commencement morning.  He had left
his queer thought-world and come back to a world of motion and of men.
He looked now for the first time sharply about him, and wondered he had
seen so little before.  He grew slowly to feel almost for the first
time the Veil that lay between him and the white world; he first
noticed now the oppression that had not seemed oppression before,
differences that erstwhile seemed natural, restraints and slights that
in his boyhood days had gone unnoticed or been greeted with a laugh.
He felt angry now when men did not call him "Mister," he clenched his
hands at the "Jim Crow" cars, and chafed at the color-line that hemmed
in him and his.  A tinge of sarcasm crept into his speech, and a vague
bitterness into his life; and he sat long hours wondering and planning
a way around these crooked things.  Daily he found himself shrinking
from the choked and narrow life of his native town.  And yet he always
planned to go back to Altamaha,--always planned to work there.  Still,
more and more as the day approached he hesitated with a nameless dread;
and even the day after graduation he seized with eagerness the offer of
the Dean to send him North with the quartette during the summer
vacation, to sing for the Institute.  A breath of air before the
plunge, he said to himself in half apology.

It was a bright September afternoon, and the streets of New York were
brilliant with moving men.  They reminded John of the sea, as he sat in
the square and watched them, so changelessly changing, so bright and
dark, so grave and gay.  He scanned their rich and faultless clothes,
the way they carried their hands, the shape of their hats; he peered
