promises to furnish the freedmen with land.  Its successes were the
result of hard work, supplemented by the aid of philanthropists and the
eager striving of black men.  Its failures were the result of bad local
agents, the inherent difficulties of the work, and national neglect.

Such an institution, from its wide powers, great responsibilities,
large control of moneys, and generally conspicuous position, was
naturally open to repeated and bitter attack.  It sustained a searching
Congressional investigation at the instance of Fernando Wood in 1870.
Its archives and few remaining functions were with blunt discourtesy
transferred from Howard's control, in his absence, to the supervision
of Secretary of War Belknap in 1872, on the Secretary's recommendation.
Finally, in consequence of grave intimations of wrong-doing made by the
Secretary and his subordinates, General Howard was court-martialed in
1874.  In both of these trials the Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau was officially exonerated from any wilful misdoing, and his work
commended.  Nevertheless, many unpleasant things were brought to
light,--the methods of transacting the business of the Bureau were
faulty; several cases of defalcation were proved, and other frauds
strongly suspected; there were some business transactions which savored
of dangerous speculation, if not dishonesty; and around it all lay the
smirch of the Freedmen's Bank.

Morally and practically, the Freedmen's Bank was part of the Freedmen's
Bureau, although it had no legal connection with it.  With the prestige
of the government back of it, and a directing board of unusual
respectability and national reputation, this banking institution had
made a remarkable start in the development of that thrift among black
folk which slavery had kept them from knowing.  Then in one sad day
came the crash,--all the hard-earned dollars of the freedmen
disappeared; but that was the least of the loss,--all the faith in
saving went too, and much of the faith in men; and that was a loss that
a Nation which to-day sneers at Negro shiftlessness has never yet made
good.  Not even ten additional years of slavery could have done so much
to throttle the thrift of the freedmen as the mismanagement and
bankruptcy of the series of savings banks chartered by the Nation for
their especial aid.  Where all the blame should rest, it is hard to
say; whether the Bureau and the Bank died chiefly by reason of the
blows of its selfish friends or the dark machinations of its foes,
perhaps even time will never reveal, for here lies unwritten history.

Of the foes without the Bureau, the bitterest were those who attacked
not so much its conduct or policy under the law as the necessity for
any such institution at all.  Such attacks came primarily from the
Border States and the South; and they were summed up by Senator Davis,
of Kentucky, when he moved to entitle the act of 1866 a bill "to
promote strife and conflict between the white and black races . . . by
a grant of unconstitutional power."  The argument gathered tremendous
strength South and North; but its very strength was its weakness.  For,
argued the plain common-sense of the nation, if it is unconstitutional,
unpractical, and futile for the nation to stand guardian over its
helpless wards, then there is left but one alternative,--to make those
wards their own guardians by arming them with the ballot.  Moreover,
the path of the practical politician pointed the same way; for, argued
this opportunist, if we cannot peacefully reconstruct the South with
white votes, we certainly can with black votes.  So justice and force
joined hands.

The alternative thus offered the nation was not between full and
restricted Negro suffrage; else every sensible man, black and white,
would easily have chosen the latter.  It was rather a choice between
suffrage and slavery, after endless blood and gold had flowed to sweep
human bondage away.  Not a single Southern legislature stood ready to
admit a Negro, under any conditions, to the polls; not a single
Southern legislature believed free Negro labor was possible without a
system of restrictions that took all its freedom away; there was
scarcely a white man in the South who did not honestly regard
Emancipation as a crime, and its practical nullification as a duty.  In
such a situation, the granting of the ballot to the black man was a
necessity, the very least a guilty nation could grant a wronged race,
and the only method of compelling the South to accept the results of
the war.  Thus Negro suffrage ended a civil war by beginning a race
feud.  And some felt gratitude toward the race thus sacrificed in its
swaddling clothes on the altar of national integrity; and some felt and
feel only indifference and contempt.

Had political exigencies been less pressing, the opposition to
government guardianship of Negroes less bitter, and the attachment to
the slave system less strong, the social seer can well imagine a far
better policy,--a permanent Freedmen's Bureau, with a national system
of Negro schools; a carefully supervised employment and labor office; a
system of impartial protection before the regular courts; and such
institutions for social betterment as savings-banks, land and building
associations, and social settlements.  All this vast expenditure of
money and brains might have formed a great school of prospective
citizenship, and solved in a way we have not yet solved the most
perplexing and persistent of the Negro problems.

That such an institution was unthinkable in 1870 was due in part to
certain acts of the Freedmen's Bureau itself.  It came to regard its
work as merely temporary, and Negro suffrage as a final answer to all
present perplexities.  The political ambition of many of its agents and
proteges led it far afield into questionable activities, until the
South, nursing its own deep prejudices, came easily to ignore all the
good deeds of the Bureau and hate its very name with perfect hatred.
So the Freedmen's Bureau died, and its child was the Fifteenth
Amendment.

The passing of a great human institution before its work is done, like
the untimely passing of a single soul, but leaves a legacy of striving
for other men.  The legacy of the Freedmen's Bureau is the heavy
heritage of this generation.  To-day, when new and vaster problems are
destined to strain every fibre of the national mind and soul, would it
not be well to count this legacy honestly and carefully?  For this much
all men know: despite compromise, war, and struggle, the Negro is not
free.  In the backwoods of the Gulf States, for miles and miles, he may
not leave the plantation of his birth; in well-nigh the whole rural
South the black farmers are peons, bound by law and custom to an
economic slavery, from which the only escape is death or the
penitentiary.  In the most cultured sections and cities of the South
the Negroes are a segregated servile caste, with restricted rights and
privileges.  Before the courts, both in law and custom, they stand on a
different and peculiar basis.  Taxation without representation is the
rule of their political life.  And the result of all this is, and in
nature must have been, lawlessness and crime.  That is the large legacy
of the Freedmen's Bureau, the work it did not do because it could not.


I have seen a land right merry with the sun, where children sing, and
rolling hills lie like passioned women wanton with harvest.  And there
in the King's Highways sat and sits a figure veiled and bowed, by which
the traveller's footsteps hasten as they go.  On the tainted air broods
fear.  Three centuries' thought has been the raising and unveiling of
that bowed human heart, and now behold a century new for the duty and
the deed.  The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the
color-line.




III

Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others

  From birth till death enslaved; in word, in deed, unmanned!
  *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
  Hereditary bondsmen!  Know ye not
  Who would be free themselves must strike the blow?

  BYRON.

Easily the most striking thing in the history of the American Negro
since 1876 is the ascendancy of Mr. Booker T. Washington.  It began at
the time when war memories and ideals were rapidly passing; a day of
astonishing commercial development was dawning; a sense of doubt and
hesitation overtook the freedmen's sons,--then it was that his leading
began.  Mr. Washington came, with a simple definite programme, at the
psychological moment when the nation was a little ashamed of having
bestowed so much sentiment on Negroes, and was concentrating its
energies on Dollars.  His programme of industrial education,
conciliation of the South, and submission and silence as to civil and
political rights, was not wholly original; the Free Negroes from 1830
up to war-time had striven to build industrial schools, and the
American Missionary Association had from the first taught various
trades; and Price and others had sought a way of honorable alliance
with the best of the Southerners.  But Mr. Washington first
indissolubly linked these things; he put enthusiasm, unlimited energy,
and perfect faith into his programme, and changed it from a by-path
into a veritable Way of Life.  And the tale of the methods by which he
did this is a fascinating study of human life.

It startled the nation to hear a Negro advocating such a programme
after many decades of bitter complaint; it startled and won the
applause of the South, it interested and won the admiration of the
North; and after a confused murmur of protest, it silenced if it did
not convert the Negroes themselves.

To gain the sympathy and cooperation of the various elements comprising
the white South was Mr. Washington's first task; and this, at the time
Tuskegee was founded, seemed, for a black man, well-nigh impossible.
And yet ten years later it was done in the word spoken at Atlanta: "In
all things purely social we can be as separate as the five fingers, and
yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress."  This
"Atlanta Compromise" is by all odds the most notable thing in Mr.
Washington's career.  The South interpreted it in different ways: the
radicals received it as a complete surrender of the demand for civil
and political equality; the conservatives, as a generously conceived
working basis for mutual understanding.  So both approved it, and
to-day its author is certainly the most distinguished Southerner since
Jefferson Davis, and the one with the largest personal following.

Next to this achievement comes Mr. Washington's work in gaining place
and consideration in the North.  Others less shrewd and tactful had
formerly essayed to sit on these two stools and had fallen between
them; but as Mr. Washington knew the heart of the South from birth and
training, so by singular insight he intuitively grasped the spirit of
the age which was dominating the North.  And so thoroughly did he learn
the speech and thought of triumphant commercialism, and the ideals of
material prosperity, that the picture of a lone black boy poring over a
French grammar amid the weeds and dirt of a neglected home soon seemed
to him the acme of absurdities.  One wonders what Socrates and St.
Francis of Assisi would say to this.

And yet this very singleness of vision and thorough oneness with his
age is a mark of the successful man.  It is as though Nature must needs
make men narrow in order to give them force.  So Mr. Washington's cult
has gained unquestioning followers, his work has wonderfully prospered,
his friends are legion, and his enemies are confounded.  To-day he
stands as the one recognized spokesman of his ten million fellows, and
one of the most notable figures in a nation of seventy millions.  One
hesitates, therefore, to criticise a life which, beginning with so
little, has done so much.  And yet the time is come when one may speak
in all sincerity and utter courtesy of the mistakes and shortcomings of
Mr. Washington's career, as well as of his triumphs, without being
thought captious or envious, and without forgetting that it is easier
to do ill than well in the world.

The criticism that has hitherto met Mr. Washington has not always been
of this broad character.  In the South especially has he had to walk
warily to avoid the harshest judgments,--and naturally so, for he is
dealing with the one subject of deepest sensitiveness to that section.
Twice--once when at the Chicago celebration of the Spanish-American War
he alluded to the color-prejudice that is "eating away the vitals of
the South," and once when he dined with President Roosevelt--has the
resulting Southern criticism been violent enough to threaten seriously
his popularity.  In the North the feeling has several times forced
itself into words, that Mr. Washington's counsels of submission
overlooked certain elements of true manhood, and that his educational
programme was unnecessarily narrow.  Usually, however, such criticism
has not found open expression, although, too, the spiritual sons of the
Abolitionists have not been prepared to acknowledge that the schools
founded before Tuskegee, by men of broad ideals and self-sacrificing
spirit, were wholly failures or worthy of ridicule.  While, then,
criticism has not failed to follow Mr. Washington, yet the prevailing
public opinion of the land has been but too willing to deliver the
solution of a wearisome problem into his hands, and say, "If that is
all you and your race ask, take it."

Among his own people, however, Mr. Washington has encountered the
strongest and most lasting opposition, amounting at times to
bitterness, and even today continuing strong and insistent even though
largely silenced in outward expression by the public opinion of the
nation.  Some of this opposition is, of course, mere envy; the
disappointment of displaced demagogues and the spite of narrow minds.
But aside from this, there is among educated and thoughtful colored men
in all parts of the land a feeling of deep regret, sorrow, and
apprehension at the wide currency and ascendancy which some of Mr.
Washington's theories have gained.  These same men admire his sincerity
of purpose, and are willing to forgive much to honest endeavor which is
doing something worth the doing.  They cooperate with Mr. Washington as
far as they conscientiously can; and, indeed, it is no ordinary tribute
to this man's tact and power that, steering as he must between so many
diverse interests and opinions, he so largely retains the respect of
all.

But the hushing of the criticism of honest opponents is a dangerous
thing.  It leads some of the best of the critics to unfortunate silence
and paralysis of effort, and others to burst into speech so
passionately and intemperately as to lose listeners.  Honest and
earnest criticism from those whose interests are most nearly
touched,--criticism of writers by readers,--this is the soul of
democracy and the safeguard of modern society.  If the best of the
American Negroes receive by outer pressure a leader whom they had not
recognized before, manifestly there is here a certain palpable gain.
Yet there is also irreparable loss,--a loss of that peculiarly valuable
education which a group receives when by search and criticism it finds
and commissions its own leaders.  The way in which this is done is at
once the most elementary and the nicest problem of social growth.
History is but the record of such group-leadership; and yet how
infinitely changeful is its type and character!  And of all types and
kinds, what can be more instructive than the leadership of a group
within a group?--that curious double movement where real progress may
be negative and actual advance be relative retrogression.  All this is
the social student's inspiration and despair.

Now in the past the American Negro has had instructive experience in
the choosing of group leaders, founding thus a peculiar dynasty which
in the light of present conditions is worth while studying.  When
sticks and stones and beasts form the sole environment of a people,
their attitude is largely one of determined opposition to and conquest
of natural forces.  But when to earth and brute is added an environment
of men and ideas, then the attitude of the imprisoned group may take
three main forms,--a feeling of revolt and revenge; an attempt to
adjust all thought and action to the will of the greater group; or,
finally, a determined effort at self-realization and self-development
despite environing opinion.  The influence of all of these attitudes at
various times can be traced in the history of the American Negro, and
in the evolution of his successive leaders.

Before 1750, while the fire of African freedom still burned in the
veins of the slaves, there was in all leadership or attempted
leadership but the one motive of revolt and revenge,--typified in the
terrible Maroons, the Danish blacks, and Cato of Stono, and veiling all
the Americas in fear of insurrection.  The liberalizing tendencies of
the latter half of the eighteenth century brought, along with kindlier
relations between black and white, thoughts of ultimate adjustment and
assimilation.  Such aspiration was especially voiced in the earnest
songs of Phyllis, in the martyrdom of Attucks, the fighting of Salem
and Poor, the intellectual accomplishments of Banneker and Derham, and
the political demands of the Cuffes.

Stern financial and social stress after the war cooled much of the
previous humanitarian ardor.  The disappointment and impatience of the
Negroes at the persistence of slavery and serfdom voiced itself in two
movements.  The slaves in the South, aroused undoubtedly by vague
rumors of the Haytian revolt, made three fierce attempts at
insurrection,--in 1800 under Gabriel in Virginia, in 1822 under Vesey
in Carolina, and in 1831 again in Virginia under the terrible Nat
Turner.  In the Free States, on the other hand, a new and curious
attempt at self-development was made.  In Philadelphia and New York
color-prescription led to a withdrawal of Negro communicants from white
churches and the formation of a peculiar socio-religious institution
among the Negroes known as the African Church,--an organization still
living and controlling in its various branches over a million of men.

Walker's wild appeal against the trend of the times showed how the
world was changing after the coming of the cotton-gin.  By 1830 slavery
seemed hopelessly fastened on the South, and the slaves thoroughly
cowed into submission.  The free Negroes of the North, inspired by the
mulatto immigrants from the West Indies, began to change the basis of
their demands; they recognized the slavery of slaves, but insisted that
they themselves were freemen, and sought assimilation and amalgamation
with the nation on the same terms with other men.  Thus, Forten and
Purvis of Philadelphia, Shad of Wilmington, Du Bois of New Haven,
Barbadoes of Boston, and others, strove singly and together as men,
they said, not as slaves; as "people of color," not as "Negroes."  The
trend of the times, however, refused them recognition save in
individual and exceptional cases, considered them as one with all the
despised blacks, and they soon found themselves striving to keep even
the rights they formerly had of voting and working and moving as
freemen.  Schemes of migration and colonization arose among them; but
these they refused to entertain, and they eventually turned to the
Abolition movement as a final refuge.

Here, led by Remond, Nell, Wells-Brown, and Douglass, a new period of
self-assertion and self-development dawned.  To be sure, ultimate
freedom and assimilation was the ideal before the leaders, but the
assertion of the manhood rights of the Negro by himself was the main
reliance, and John Brown's raid was the extreme of its logic.  After
the war and emancipation, the great form of Frederick Douglass, the
greatest of American Negro leaders, still led the host.
Self-assertion, especially in political lines, was the main programme,
and behind Douglass came Elliot, Bruce, and Langston, and the
Reconstruction politicians, and, less conspicuous but of greater social
significance, Alexander Crummell and Bishop Daniel Payne.

Then came the Revolution of 1876, the suppression of the Negro votes,
the changing and shifting of ideals, and the seeking of new lights in
the great night.  Douglass, in his old age, still bravely stood for the
ideals of his early manhood,--ultimate assimilation through
self-assertion, and on no other terms.  For a time Price arose as a new
leader, destined, it seemed, not to give up, but to re-state the old
ideals in a form less repugnant to the white South.  But he passed away
in his prime.  Then came the new leader.  Nearly all the former ones
had become leaders by the silent suffrage of their fellows, had sought
to lead their own people alone, and were usually, save Douglass, little
known outside their race.  But Booker T. Washington arose as
essentially the leader not of one race but of two,--a compromiser
between the South, the North, and the Negro.  Naturally the Negroes
resented, at first bitterly, signs of compromise which surrendered
their civil and political rights, even though this was to be exchanged
for larger chances of economic development.  The rich and dominating
North, however, was not only weary of the race problem, but was
investing largely in Southern enterprises, and welcomed any method of
peaceful cooperation.  Thus, by national opinion, the Negroes began to
recognize Mr. Washington's leadership; and the voice of criticism was
hushed.

Mr. Washington represents in Negro thought the old attitude of
adjustment and submission; but adjustment at such a peculiar time as to
make his programme unique.  This is an age of unusual economic
development, and Mr. Washington's programme naturally takes an economic
cast, becoming a gospel of Work and Money to such an extent as
apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims of life.
Moreover, this is an age when the more advanced races are coming in
closer contact with the less developed races, and the race-feeling is
therefore intensified; and Mr. Washington's programme practically
accepts the alleged inferiority of the Negro races.  Again, in our own
land, the reaction from the sentiment of war time has given impetus to
race-prejudice against Negroes, and Mr. Washington withdraws many of
the high demands of Negroes as men and American citizens.  In other
periods of intensified prejudice all the Negro's tendency to
self-assertion has been called forth; at this period a policy of
submission is advocated.  In the history of nearly all other races and
peoples the doctrine preached at such crises has been that manly
self-respect is worth more than lands and houses, and that a people who
voluntarily surrender such respect, or cease striving for it, are not
worth civilizing.

In answer to this, it has been claimed that the Negro can survive only
through submission.  Mr. Washington distinctly asks that black people
give up, at least for the present, three things,--

First, political power,

Second, insistence on civil rights,

Third, higher education of Negro youth,--and concentrate all their
energies on industrial education, and accumulation of wealth, and the
conciliation of the South.  This policy has been courageously and
insistently advocated for over fifteen years, and has been triumphant
for perhaps ten years.  As a result of this tender of the palm-branch,
what has been the return?  In these years there have occurred:

1.  The disfranchisement of the Negro.

2.  The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for
the Negro.

3.  The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher
training of the Negro.

These movements are not, to be sure, direct results of Mr. Washington's
teachings; but his propaganda has, without a shadow of doubt, helped
their speedier accomplishment.  The question then comes: Is it
possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective
progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights,
made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meagre chance for
developing their exceptional men?  If history and reason give any
distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic NO.  And Mr.
Washington thus faces the triple paradox of his career:

1.  He is striving nobly to make Negro artisans business men and
property-owners; but it is utterly impossible, under modern competitive
methods, for workingmen and property-owners to defend their rights and
exist without the right of suffrage.

2.  He insists on thrift and self-respect, but at the same time
counsels a silent submission to civic inferiority such as is bound to
sap the manhood of any race in the long run.

3.  He advocates common-school and industrial training, and depreciates
institutions of higher learning; but neither the Negro common-schools,
nor Tuskegee itself, could remain open a day were it not for teachers
trained in Negro colleges, or trained by their graduates.

This triple paradox in Mr. Washington's position is the object of
criticism by two classes of colored Americans.  One class is
spiritually descended from Toussaint the Savior, through Gabriel,
Vesey, and Turner, and they represent the attitude of revolt and
revenge; they hate the white South blindly and distrust the white race
generally, and so far as they agree on definite action, think that the
Negro's only hope lies in emigration beyond the borders of the United
States.  And yet, by the irony of fate, nothing has more effectually
made this programme seem hopeless than the recent course of the United
States toward weaker and darker peoples in the West Indies, Hawaii, and
the Philippines,--for where in the world may we go and be safe from
lying and brute force?

The other class of Negroes who cannot agree with Mr. Washington has
hitherto said little aloud.  They deprecate the sight of scattered
counsels, of internal disagreement; and especially they dislike making
their just criticism of a useful and earnest man an excuse for a
general discharge of venom from small-minded opponents.  Nevertheless,
the questions involved are so fundamental and serious that it is
difficult to see how men like the Grimkes, Kelly Miller, J. W. E.
Bowen, and other representatives of this group, can much longer be
silent.  Such men feel in conscience bound to ask of this nation three
things:

1.  The right to vote.

2.  Civic equality.

3.  The education of youth according to ability.  They acknowledge Mr.
Washington's invaluable service in counselling patience and courtesy in
such demands; they do not ask that ignorant black men vote when
ignorant whites are debarred, or that any reasonable restrictions in
the suffrage should not be applied; they know that the low social level
of the mass of the race is responsible for much discrimination against
it, but they also know, and the nation knows, that relentless
color-prejudice is more often a cause than a result of the Negro's
degradation; they seek the abatement of this relic of barbarism, and
not its systematic encouragement and pampering by all agencies of
social power from the Associated Press to the Church of Christ.  They
advocate, with Mr. Washington, a broad system of Negro common schools
supplemented by thorough industrial training; but they are surprised
that a man of Mr. Washington's insight cannot see that no such
educational system ever has rested or can rest on any other basis than
that of the well-equipped college and university, and they insist that
there is a demand for a few such institutions throughout the South to
train the best of the Negro youth as teachers, professional men, and
leaders.

This group of men honor Mr. Washington for his attitude of conciliation
toward the white South; they accept the "Atlanta Compromise" in its
broadest interpretation; they recognize, with him, many signs of
promise, many men of high purpose and fair judgment, in this section;
they know that no easy task has been laid upon a region already
tottering under heavy burdens.  But, nevertheless, they insist that the
way to truth and right lies in straightforward honesty, not in
indiscriminate flattery; in praising those of the South who do well and
criticising uncompromisingly those who do ill; in taking advantage of
the opportunities at hand and urging their fellows to do the same, but
at the same time in remembering that only a firm adherence to their
higher ideals and aspirations will ever keep those ideals within the
realm of possibility.  They do not expect that the free right to vote,
to enjoy civic rights, and to be educated, will come in a moment; they
do not expect to see the bias and prejudices of years disappear at the
blast of a trumpet; but they are absolutely certain that the way for a
people to gain their reasonable rights is not by voluntarily throwing
them away and insisting that they do not want them; that the way for a
people to gain respect is not by continually belittling and ridiculing
themselves; that, on the contrary, Negroes must insist continually, in
season and out of season, that voting is necessary to modern manhood,
that color discrimination is barbarism, and that black boys need
education as well as white boys.

In failing thus to state plainly and unequivocally the legitimate
demands of their people, even at the cost of opposing an honored
leader, the thinking classes of American Negroes would shirk a heavy
responsibility,--a responsibility to themselves, a responsibility to
the struggling masses, a responsibility to the darker races of men
whose future depends so largely on this American experiment, but
especially a responsibility to this nation,--this common Fatherland.
It is wrong to encourage a man or a people in evil-doing; it is wrong
to aid and abet a national crime simply because it is unpopular not to
do so.  The growing spirit of kindliness and reconciliation between the
North and South after the frightful difference of a generation ago
ought to be a source of deep congratulation to all, and especially to
those whose mistreatment caused the war; but if that reconciliation is
to be marked by the industrial slavery and civic death of those same
black men, with permanent legislation into a position of inferiority,
then those black men, if they are really men, are called upon by every
consideration of patriotism and loyalty to oppose such a course by all
civilized methods, even though such opposition involves disagreement
with Mr. Booker T. Washington.  We have no right to sit silently by
while the inevitable seeds are sown for a harvest of disaster to our
children, black and white.

First, it is the duty of black men to judge the South discriminatingly.
The present generation of Southerners are not responsible for the past,
and they should not be blindly hated or blamed for it.  Furthermore, to
no class is the indiscriminate endorsement of the recent course of the
South toward Negroes more nauseating than to the best thought of the
South.  The South is not "solid"; it is a land in the ferment of social
change, wherein forces of all kinds are fighting for supremacy; and to
praise the ill the South is today perpetrating is just as wrong as to
condemn the good.  Discriminating and broad-minded criticism is what
the South needs,--needs it for the sake of her own white sons and
daughters, and for the insurance of robust, healthy mental and moral
development.

Today even the attitude of the Southern whites toward the blacks is
not, as so many assume, in all cases the same; the ignorant Southerner
hates the Negro, the workingmen fear his competition, the money-makers
wish to use him as a laborer, some of the educated see a menace in his
upward development, while others--usually the sons of the masters--wish
to help him to rise.  National opinion has enabled this last class to
maintain the Negro common schools, and to protect the Negro partially
in property, life, and limb.  Through the pressure of the money-makers,
the Negro is in danger of being reduced to semi-slavery, especially in
the country districts; the workingmen, and those of the educated who
fear the Negro, have united to disfranchise him, and some have urged
his deportation; while the passions of the ignorant are easily aroused
to lynch and abuse any black man.  To praise this intricate whirl of
thought and prejudice is nonsense; to inveigh indiscriminately against
"the South" is unjust; but to use the same breath in praising Governor
Aycock, exposing Senator Morgan, arguing with Mr. Thomas Nelson Page,
and denouncing Senator Ben Tillman, is not only sane, but the
imperative duty of thinking black men.

It would be unjust to Mr. Washington not to acknowledge that in several
instances he has opposed movements in the South which were unjust to
the Negro; he sent memorials to the Louisiana and Alabama
constitutional conventions, he has spoken against lynching, and in
other ways has openly or silently set his influence against sinister
schemes and unfortunate happenings.  Notwithstanding this, it is
equally true to assert that on the whole the distinct impression left
by Mr. Washington's propaganda is, first, that the South is justified
in its present attitude toward the Negro because of the Negro's
degradation; secondly, that the prime cause of the Negro's failure to
rise more quickly is his wrong education in the past; and, thirdly,
that his future rise depends primarily on his own efforts.  Each of
these propositions is a dangerous half-truth.  The supplementary truths
must never be lost sight of: first, slavery and race-prejudice are
potent if not sufficient causes of the Negro's position; second,
industrial and common-school training were necessarily slow in planting
because they had to await the black teachers trained by higher
institutions,--it being extremely doubtful if any essentially different
development was possible, and certainly a Tuskegee was unthinkable
before 1880; and, third, while it is a great truth to say that the
Negro must strive and strive mightily to help himself, it is equally
true that unless his striving be not simply seconded, but rather
aroused and encouraged, by the initiative of the richer and wiser
environing group, he cannot hope for great success.

In his failure to realize and impress this last point, Mr. Washington
is especially to be criticised.  His doctrine has tended to make the
whites, North and South, shift the burden of the Negro problem to the
Negro's shoulders and stand aside as critical and rather pessimistic
spectators; when in fact the burden belongs to the nation, and the
hands of none of us are clean if we bend not our energies to righting
these great wrongs.

The South ought to be led, by candid and honest criticism, to assert
her better self and do her full duty to the race she has cruelly
wronged and is still wronging.  The North--her co-partner in
guilt--cannot salve her conscience by plastering it with gold.  We
cannot settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by "policy"
alone.  If worse come to worst, can the moral fibre of this country
survive the slow throttling and murder of nine millions of men?

The black men of America have a duty to perform, a duty stern and
delicate,--a forward movement to oppose a part of the work of their
greatest leader.  So far as Mr. Washington preaches Thrift, Patience,
and Industrial Training for the masses, we must hold up his hands and
strive with him, rejoicing in his honors and glorying in the strength
of this Joshua called of God and of man to lead the headless host.  But
so far as Mr. Washington apologizes for injustice, North or South, does
not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the
emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher
training and ambition of our brighter minds,--so far as he, the South,
or the Nation, does this,--we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them.
By every civilized and peaceful method we must strive for the rights
which the world accords to men, clinging unwaveringly to those great
words which the sons of the Fathers would fain forget: "We hold these
truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that
among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."




IV

Of the Meaning of Progress

  Willst Du Deine Macht verkunden,
  Wahle sie die frei von Sunden,
  Steh'n in Deinem ew'gen Haus!
  Deine Geister sende aus!
  Die Unsterblichen, die Reinen,
  Die nicht fuhlen, die nicht weinen!
  Nicht die zarte Jungfrau wahle,
  Nicht der Hirtin weiche Seele!

  SCHILLER.


Once upon a time I taught school in the hills of Tennessee, where the
broad dark vale of the Mississippi begins to roll and crumple to greet
the Alleghanies.  I was a Fisk student then, and all Fisk men thought
that Tennessee--beyond the Veil--was theirs alone, and in vacation time
they sallied forth in lusty bands to meet the county
school-commissioners.  Young and happy, I too went, and I shall not
soon forget that summer, seventeen years ago.

First, there was a Teachers' Institute at the county-seat; and there
distinguished guests of the superintendent taught the teachers
fractions and spelling and other mysteries,--white teachers in the
morning, Negroes at night.  A picnic now and then, and a supper, and
the rough world was softened by laughter and song.  I remember how--
But I wander.

There came a day when all the teachers left the Institute and began the
hunt for schools.  I learn from hearsay (for my mother was mortally
afraid of firearms) that the hunting of ducks and bears and men is
wonderfully interesting, but I am sure that the man who has never
hunted a country school has something to learn of the pleasures of the
chase.  I see now the white, hot roads lazily rise and fall and wind
before me under the burning July sun; I feel the deep weariness of
heart and limb as ten, eight, six miles stretch relentlessly ahead; I
feel my heart sink heavily as I hear again and again, "Got a teacher?
Yes."  So I walked on and on--horses were too expensive--until I had
wandered beyond railways, beyond stage lines, to a land of "varmints"
and rattlesnakes, where the coming of a stranger was an event, and men
lived and died in the shadow of one blue hill.

Sprinkled over hill and dale lay cabins and farmhouses, shut out from
the world by the forests and the rolling hills toward the east.  There
I found at last a little school.  Josie told me of it; she was a thin,
homely girl of twenty, with a dark-brown face and thick, hard hair.  I
had crossed the stream at Watertown, and rested under the great
willows; then I had gone to the little cabin in the lot where Josie was
resting on her way to town.  The gaunt farmer made me welcome, and
Josie, hearing my errand, told me anxiously that they wanted a school
over the hill; that but once since the war had a teacher been there;
that she herself longed to learn,--and thus she ran on, talking fast
and loud, with much earnestness and energy.

Next morning I crossed the tall round hill, lingered to look at the
blue and yellow mountains stretching toward the Carolinas, then plunged
into the wood, and came out at Josie's home.  It was a dull frame
cottage with four rooms, perched just below the brow of the hill, amid
peach-trees.  The father was a quiet, simple soul, calmly ignorant,
with no touch of vulgarity.  The mother was different,--strong,
bustling, and energetic, with a quick, restless tongue, and an ambition
to live "like folks." There was a crowd of children.  Two boys had gone
away.  There remained two growing girls; a shy midget of eight; John,
tall, awkward, and eighteen; Jim, younger, quicker, and better looking;
and two babies of indefinite age.  Then there was Josie herself.  She
seemed to be the centre of the family: always busy at service, or at
home, or berry-picking; a little nervous and inclined to scold, like
her mother, yet faithful, too, like her father.  She had about her a
certain fineness, the shadow of an unconscious moral heroism that would
willingly give all of life to make life broader, deeper, and fuller for
her and hers.  I saw much of this family afterwards, and grew to love
them for their honest efforts to be decent and comfortable, and for
their knowledge of their own ignorance.  There was with them no
affectation.  The mother would scold the father for being so "easy";
Josie would roundly berate the boys for carelessness; and all knew that
it was a hard thing to dig a living out of a rocky side-hill.

I secured the school.  I remember the day I rode horseback out to the
commissioner's house with a pleasant young white fellow who wanted the
white school.  The road ran down the bed of a stream; the sun laughed
and the water jingled, and we rode on.  "Come in," said the
commissioner,--"come in.  Have a seat.  Yes, that certificate will do.
Stay to dinner.  What do you want a month?"  "Oh," thought I, "this is
lucky"; but even then fell the awful shadow of the Veil, for they ate
first, then I--alone.

The schoolhouse was a log hut, where Colonel Wheeler used to shelter
his corn.  It sat in a lot behind a rail fence and thorn bushes, near
the sweetest of springs.  There was an entrance where a door once was,
and within, a massive rickety fireplace; great chinks between the logs
served as windows.  Furniture was scarce.  A pale blackboard crouched
in the corner.  My desk was made of three boards, reinforced at
critical points, and my chair, borrowed from the landlady, had to be
returned every night.  Seats for the children--these puzzled me much.
I was haunted by a New England vision of neat little desks and chairs,
but, alas! the reality was rough plank benches without backs, and at
times without legs.  They had the one virtue of making naps
dangerous,--possibly fatal, for the floor was not to be trusted.

It was a hot morning late in July when the school opened.  I trembled
when I heard the patter of little feet down the dusty road, and saw the
growing row of dark solemn faces and bright eager eyes facing me.
First came Josie and her brothers and sisters.  The longing to know, to
be a student in the great school at Nashville, hovered like a star
above this child-woman amid her work and worry, and she studied
doggedly.  There were the Dowells from their farm over toward
Alexandria,--Fanny, with her smooth black face and wondering eyes;
Martha, brown and dull; the pretty girl-wife of a brother, and the
younger brood.

There were the Burkes,--two brown and yellow lads, and a tiny
haughty-eyed girl.  Fat Reuben's little chubby girl came, with golden
face and old-gold hair, faithful and solemn.  'Thenie was on hand
early,--a jolly, ugly, good-hearted girl, who slyly dipped snuff and
looked after her little bow-legged brother.  When her mother could
spare her, 'Tildy came,--a midnight beauty, with starry eyes and
tapering limbs; and her brother, correspondingly homely.  And then the
big boys,--the hulking Lawrences; the lazy Neills, unfathered sons of
mother and daughter; Hickman, with a stoop in his shoulders; and the
rest.

There they sat, nearly thirty of them, on the rough benches, their
faces shading from a pale cream to a deep brown, the little feet bare
and swinging, the eyes full of expectation, with here and there a
twinkle of mischief, and the hands grasping Webster's blue-black
spelling-book.  I loved my school, and the fine faith the children had
in the wisdom of their teacher was truly marvellous.  We read and
spelled together, wrote a little, picked flowers, sang, and listened to
stories of the world beyond the hill.  At times the school would
dwindle away, and I would start out.  I would visit Mun Eddings, who
lived in two very dirty rooms, and ask why little Lugene, whose flaming
face seemed ever ablaze with the dark-red hair uncombed, was absent all
last week, or why I missed so often the inimitable rags of Mack and Ed.
Then the father, who worked Colonel Wheeler's farm on shares, would
tell me how the crops needed the boys; and the thin, slovenly mother,
whose face was pretty when washed, assured me that Lugene must mind the
baby.  "But we'll start them again next week."  When the Lawrences
stopped, I knew that the doubts of the old folks about book-learning
had conquered again, and so, toiling up the hill, and getting as far
into the cabin as possible, I put Cicero "pro Archia Poeta" into the
simplest English with local applications, and usually convinced
them--for a week or so.

On Friday nights I often went home with some of the
children,--sometimes to Doc Burke's farm.  He was a great, loud, thin
Black, ever working, and trying to buy the seventy-five acres of hill
and dale where he lived; but people said that he would surely fail, and
the "white folks would get it all."  His wife was a magnificent Amazon,
with saffron face and shining hair, uncorseted and barefooted, and the
children were strong and beautiful.  They lived in a
one-and-a-half-room cabin in the hollow of the farm, near the spring.
The front room was full of great fat white beds, scrupulously neat; and
there were bad chromos on the walls, and a tired centre-table.  In the
tiny back kitchen I was often invited to "take out and help" myself to
fried chicken and wheat biscuit, "meat" and corn pone, string-beans and
berries.  At first I used to be a little alarmed at the approach of
bedtime in the one lone bedroom, but embarrassment was very deftly
avoided.  First, all the children nodded and slept, and were stowed
away in one great pile of goose feathers; next, the mother and the
father discreetly slipped away to the kitchen while I went to bed;
then, blowing out the dim light, they retired in the dark.  In the
morning all were up and away before I thought of awaking.  Across the
road, where fat Reuben lived, they all went outdoors while the teacher
retired, because they did not boast the luxury of a kitchen.

I liked to stay with the Dowells, for they had four rooms and plenty of
good country fare.  Uncle Bird had a small, rough farm, all woods and
hills, miles from the big road; but he was full of tales,--he preached
now and then,--and with his children, berries, horses, and wheat he was
happy and prosperous.  Often, to keep the peace, I must go where life
was less lovely; for instance, 'Tildy's mother was incorrigibly dirty,
Reuben's larder was limited seriously, and herds of untamed insects
wandered over the Eddingses' beds.  Best of all I loved to go to
Josie's, and sit on the porch, eating peaches, while the mother bustled
and talked: how Josie had bought the sewing-machine; how Josie worked
at service in winter, but that four dollars a month was "mighty little"
wages; how Josie longed to go away to school, but that it "looked like"
they never could get far enough ahead to let her; how the crops failed
and the well was yet unfinished; and, finally, how "mean" some of the
white folks were.

For two summers I lived in this little world; it was dull and humdrum.
The girls looked at the hill in wistful longing, and the boys fretted
and haunted Alexandria.  Alexandria was "town,"--a straggling, lazy
village of houses, churches, and shops, and an aristocracy of Toms,
Dicks, and Captains.  Cuddled on the hill to the north was the village
of the colored folks, who lived in three- or four-room unpainted
cottages, some neat and homelike, and some dirty.  The dwellings were
scattered rather aimlessly, but they centred about the twin temples of
the hamlet, the Methodist, and the Hard-Shell Baptist churches.  These,
in turn, leaned gingerly on a sad-colored schoolhouse.  Hither my
little world wended its crooked way on Sunday to meet other worlds, and
gossip, and wonder, and make the weekly sacrifice with frenzied priest
at the altar of the "old-time religion."  Then the soft melody and
mighty cadences of Negro song fluttered and thundered.

I have called my tiny community a world, and so its isolation made it;
and yet there was among us but a half-awakened common consciousness,
sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth, or wedding; from a
common hardship in poverty, poor land, and low wages; and, above all,
from the sight of the Veil that hung between us and Opportunity.  All
this caused us to think some thoughts together; but these, when ripe
for speech, were spoken in various languages.  Those whose eyes
twenty-five and more years before had seen "the glory of the coming of
the Lord," saw in every present hindrance or help a dark fatalism bound
to bring all things right in His own good time.  The mass of those to
whom slavery was a dim recollection of childhood found the world a
puzzling thing: it asked little of them, and they answered with little,
and yet it ridiculed their offering.  Such a paradox they could not
understand, and therefore sank into listless indifference, or
shiftlessness, or reckless bravado.  There were, however, some--such as
Josie, Jim, and Ben--to whom War, Hell, and Slavery were but childhood
tales, whose young appetites had been whetted to an edge by school and
story and half-awakened thought.  Ill could they be content, born
without and beyond the World.  And their weak wings beat against their
barriers,--barriers of caste, of youth, of life; at last, in dangerous
moments, against everything that opposed even a whim.


The ten years that follow youth, the years when first the realization
comes that life is leading somewhere,--these were the years that passed
after I left my little school.  When they were past, I came by chance
once more to the walls of Fisk University, to the halls of the chapel
of melody.  As I lingered there in the joy and pain of meeting old
school-friends, there swept over me a sudden longing to pass again
beyond the blue hill, and to see the homes and the school of other
days, and to learn how life had gone with my school-children; and I
went.

Josie was dead, and the gray-haired mother said simply, "We've had a
heap of trouble since you've been away."  I had feared for Jim.  With a
cultured parentage and a social caste to uphold him, he might have made
a venturesome merchant or a West Point cadet.  But here he was, angry
with life and reckless; and when Fanner Durham charged him with
stealing wheat, the old man had to ride fast to escape the stones which
the furious fool hurled after him.  They told Jim to run away; but he
would not run, and the constable came that afternoon.  It grieved
Josie, and great awkward John walked nine miles every day to see his
little brother through the bars of Lebanon jail.  At last the two came
back together in the dark night.  The mother cooked supper, and Josie
emptied her purse, and the boys stole away.  Josie grew thin and
silent, yet worked the more.  The hill became steep for the quiet old
father, and with the boys away there was little to do in the valley.
Josie helped them to sell the old farm, and they moved nearer town.
Brother Dennis, the carpenter, built a new house with six rooms; Josie
toiled a year in Nashville, and brought back ninety dollars to furnish
the house and change it to a home.

When the spring came, and the birds twittered, and the stream ran proud
and full, little sister Lizzie, bold and thoughtless, flushed with the
passion of youth, bestowed herself on the tempter, and brought home a
nameless child.  Josie shivered and worked on, with the vision of
schooldays all fled, with a face wan and tired,--worked until, on a
summer's day, some one married another; then Josie crept to her mother
like a hurt child, and slept--and sleeps.

I paused to scent the breeze as I entered the valley.  The Lawrences
have gone,--father and son forever,--and the other son lazily digs in
the earth to live.  A new young widow rents out their cabin to fat
Reuben.  Reuben is a Baptist preacher now, but I fear as lazy as ever,
though his cabin has three rooms; and little Ella has grown into a
bouncing woman, and is ploughing corn on the hot hillside.  There are
babies a-plenty, and one half-witted girl.  Across the valley is a
house I did not know before, and there I found, rocking one baby and
expecting another, one of my schoolgirls, a daughter of Uncle Bird
Dowell.  She looked somewhat worried with her new duties, but soon
bristled into pride over her neat cabin and the tale of her thrifty
husband, and the horse and cow, and the farm they were planning to buy.

My log schoolhouse was gone.  In its place stood Progress; and
Progress, I understand, is necessarily ugly.  The crazy foundation
stones still marked the former site of my poor little cabin, and not
far away, on six weary boulders, perched a jaunty board house, perhaps
twenty by thirty feet, with three windows and a door that locked.  Some
of the window-glass was broken, and part of an old iron stove lay
mournfully under the house.  I peeped through the window half
reverently, and found things that were more familiar.  The blackboard
had grown by about two feet, and the seats were still without backs.
The county owns the lot now, I hear, and every year there is a session
of school.  As I sat by the spring and looked on the Old and the New I
felt glad, very glad, and yet--

After two long drinks I started on.  There was the great double
log-house on the corner.  I remembered the broken, blighted family that
used to live there.  The strong, hard face of the mother, with its
wilderness of hair, rose before me.  She had driven her husband away,
and while I taught school a strange man lived there, big and jovial,
and people talked.  I felt sure that Ben and 'Tildy would come to
naught from such a home.  But this is an odd world; for Ben is a busy
farmer in Smith County, "doing well, too," they say, and he had cared
for little 'Tildy until last spring, when a lover married her.  A hard
life the lad had led, toiling for meat, and laughed at because he was
homely and crooked.  There was Sam Carlon, an impudent old skinflint,
who had definite notions about "niggers," and hired Ben a summer and
would not pay him.  Then the hungry boy gathered his sacks together,
and in broad daylight went into Carlon's corn; and when the hard-fisted
farmer set upon him, the angry boy flew at him like a beast.  Doc Burke
saved a murder and a lynching that day.

The story reminded me again of the Burkes, and an impatience seized me
to know who won in the battle, Doc or the seventy-five acres.  For it
is a hard thing to make a farm out of nothing, even in fifteen years.
So I hurried on, thinking of the Burkes.  They used to have a certain
magnificent barbarism about them that I liked.  They were never vulgar,
never immoral, but rather rough and primitive, with an
unconventionality that spent itself in loud guffaws, slaps on the back,
and naps in the corner.  I hurried by the cottage of the misborn Neill
boys.  It was empty, and they were grown into fat, lazy farm-hands.  I
saw the home of the Hickmans, but Albert, with his stooping shoulders,
had passed from the world.  Then I came to the Burkes' gate and peered
through; the enclosure looked rough and untrimmed, and yet there were
the same fences around the old farm save to the left, where lay
twenty-five other acres.  And lo! the cabin in the hollow had climbed
the hill and swollen to a half-finished six-room cottage.

The Burkes held a hundred acres, but they were still in debt.  Indeed,
the gaunt father who toiled night and day would scarcely be happy out
of debt, being so used to it.  Some day he must stop, for his massive
frame is showing decline.  The mother wore shoes, but the lion-like
physique of other days was broken.  The children had grown up.  Rob,
the image of his father, was loud and rough with laughter.  Birdie, my
school baby of six, had grown to a picture of maiden beauty, tall and
tawny.  "Edgar is gone," said the mother, with head half bowed,--"gone
to work in Nashville; he and his father couldn't agree."

Little Doc, the boy born since the time of my school, took me horseback
down the creek next morning toward Farmer Dowell's.  The road and the
stream were battling for mastery, and the stream had the better of it.
We splashed and waded, and the merry boy, perched behind me, chattered
and laughed.  He showed me where Simon Thompson had bought a bit of
ground and a home; but his daughter Lana, a plump, brown, slow girl,
was not there.  She had married a man and a farm twenty miles away.  We
wound on down the stream till we came to a gate that I did not
recognize, but the boy insisted that it was "Uncle Bird's."  The farm
was fat with the growing crop.  In that little valley was a strange
stillness as I rode up; for death and marriage had stolen youth and
left age and childhood there.  We sat and talked that night after the
chores were done.  Uncle Bird was grayer, and his eyes did not see so
well, but he was still jovial.  We talked of the acres bought,--one
hundred and twenty-five,--of the new guest-chamber added, of Martha's
marrying.  Then we talked of death: Fanny and Fred were gone; a shadow
hung over the other daughter, and when it lifted she was to go to
Nashville to school.  At last we spoke of the neighbors, and as night
fell, Uncle Bird told me how, on a night like that, 'Thenie came
wandering back to her home over yonder, to escape the blows of her
husband.  And next morning she died in the home that her little
bow-legged brother, working and saving, had bought for their widowed
mother.

My journey was done, and behind me lay hill and dale, and Life and
Death.  How shall man measure Progress there where the dark-faced Josie
lies?  How many heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat?
How hard a thing is life to the lowly, and yet how human and real!  And
all this life and love and strife and failure,--is it the twilight of
nightfall or the flush of some faint-dawning day?

Thus sadly musing, I rode to Nashville in the Jim Crow car.




V

Of the Wings of Atalanta

  O black boy of Atlanta!
    But half was spoken;
  The slave's chains and the master's
    Alike are broken;
  The one curse of the races
    Held both in tether;
  They are rising--all are rising--
    The black and white together.

  WHITTIER.


South of the North, yet north of the South, lies the City of a Hundred
Hills, peering out from the shadows of the past into the promise of the
future.  I have seen her in the morning, when the first flush of day
had half-roused her; she lay gray and still on the crimson soil of
Georgia; then the blue smoke began to curl from her chimneys, the
tinkle of bell and scream of whistle broke the silence, the rattle and
