but versed in farmlore, as his nodding crops declare.  This
distressingly new board house is his, and he has just moved out of
yonder moss-grown cabin with its one square room.

From the curtains in Benton's house, down the road, a dark comely face
is staring at the strangers; for passing carriages are not every-day
occurrences here.  Benton is an intelligent yellow man with a
good-sized family, and manages a plantation blasted by the war and now
the broken staff of the widow.  He might be well-to-do, they say; but
he carouses too much in Albany.  And the half-desolate spirit of
neglect born of the very soil seems to have settled on these acres.  In
times past there were cotton-gins and machinery here; but they have
rotted away.

The whole land seems forlorn and forsaken.  Here are the remnants of
the vast plantations of the Sheldons, the Pellots, and the Rensons; but
the souls of them are passed.  The houses lie in half ruin, or have
wholly disappeared; the fences have flown, and the families are
wandering in the world.  Strange vicissitudes have met these whilom
masters.  Yonder stretch the wide acres of Bildad Reasor; he died in
war-time, but the upstart overseer hastened to wed the widow.  Then he
went, and his neighbors too, and now only the black tenant remains; but
the shadow-hand of the master's grand-nephew or cousin or creditor
stretches out of the gray distance to collect the rack-rent
remorselessly, and so the land is uncared-for and poor.  Only black
tenants can stand such a system, and they only because they must.  Ten
miles we have ridden to-day and have seen no white face.

A resistless feeling of depression falls slowly upon us, despite the
gaudy sunshine and the green cottonfields.  This, then, is the Cotton
Kingdom,--the shadow of a marvellous dream.  And where is the King?
Perhaps this is he,--the sweating ploughman, tilling his eighty acres
with two lean mules, and fighting a hard battle with debt.  So we sit
musing, until, as we turn a corner on the sandy road, there comes a
fairer scene suddenly in view,--a neat cottage snugly ensconced by the
road, and near it a little store.  A tall bronzed man rises from the
porch as we hail him, and comes out to our carriage.  He is six feet in
height, with a sober face that smiles gravely.  He walks too straight
to be a tenant,--yes, he owns two hundred and forty acres.  "The land
is run down since the boom-days of eighteen hundred and fifty," he
explains, and cotton is low.  Three black tenants live on his place,
and in his little store he keeps a small stock of tobacco, snuff, soap,
and soda, for the neighborhood.  Here is his gin-house with new
machinery just installed.  Three hundred bales of cotton went through
it last year.  Two children he has sent away to school.  Yes, he says
sadly, he is getting on, but cotton is down to four cents; I know how
Debt sits staring at him.

Wherever the King may be, the parks and palaces of the Cotton Kingdom
have not wholly disappeared.  We plunge even now into great groves of
oak and towering pine, with an undergrowth of myrtle and shrubbery.
This was the "home-house" of the Thompsons,--slave-barons who drove
their coach and four in the merry past.  All is silence now, and ashes,
and tangled weeds.  The owner put his whole fortune into the rising
cotton industry of the fifties, and with the falling prices of the
eighties he packed up and stole away.  Yonder is another grove, with
unkempt lawn, great magnolias, and grass-grown paths.  The Big House
stands in half-ruin, its great front door staring blankly at the
street, and the back part grotesquely restored for its black tenant.  A
shabby, well-built Negro he is, unlucky and irresolute.  He digs hard
to pay rent to the white girl who owns the remnant of the place.  She
married a policeman, and lives in Savannah.

Now and again we come to churches.  Here is one now,--Shepherd's, they
call it,--a great whitewashed barn of a thing, perched on stilts of
stone, and looking for all the world as though it were just resting
here a moment and might be expected to waddle off down the road at
almost any time.  And yet it is the centre of a hundred cabin homes;
and sometimes, of a Sunday, five hundred persons from far and near
gather here and talk and eat and sing.  There is a schoolhouse near,--a
very airy, empty shed; but even this is an improvement, for usually the
school is held in the church.  The churches vary from log-huts to those
like Shepherd's, and the schools from nothing to this little house that
sits demurely on the county line.  It is a tiny plank-house, perhaps
ten by twenty, and has within a double row of rough unplaned benches,
resting mostly on legs, sometimes on boxes.  Opposite the door is a
square home-made desk.  In one corner are the ruins of a stove, and in
the other a dim blackboard.  It is the cheerfulest schoolhouse I have
seen in Dougherty, save in town.  Back of the schoolhouse is a
lodgehouse two stories high and not quite finished.  Societies meet
there,--societies "to care for the sick and bury the dead"; and these
societies grow and flourish.

We had come to the boundaries of Dougherty, and were about to turn west
along the county-line, when all these sights were pointed out to us by
a kindly old man, black, white-haired, and seventy.  Forty-five years
he had lived here, and now supports himself and his old wife by the
help of the steer tethered yonder and the charity of his black
neighbors.  He shows us the farm of the Hills just across the county
line in Baker,--a widow and two strapping sons, who raised ten bales
(one need not add "cotton" down here) last year.  There are fences and
pigs and cows, and the soft-voiced, velvet-skinned young Memnon, who
sauntered half-bashfully over to greet the strangers, is proud of his
home.  We turn now to the west along the county line.  Great dismantled
trunks of pines tower above the green cottonfields, cracking their
naked gnarled fingers toward the border of living forest beyond.  There
is little beauty in this region, only a sort of crude abandon that
suggests power,--a naked grandeur, as it were.  The houses are bare and
straight; there are no hammocks or easy-chairs, and few flowers.  So
when, as here at Rawdon's, one sees a vine clinging to a little porch,
and home-like windows peeping over the fences, one takes a long breath.
I think I never before quite realized the place of the Fence in
civilization.  This is the Land of the Unfenced, where crouch on either
hand scores of ugly one-room cabins, cheerless and dirty.  Here lies
the Negro problem in its naked dirt and penury.  And here are no
fences.  But now and then the crisscross rails or straight palings
break into view, and then we know a touch of culture is near.  Of
course Harrison Gohagen,--a quiet yellow man, young, smooth-faced, and
diligent,--of course he is lord of some hundred acres, and we expect to
see a vision of well-kept rooms and fat beds and laughing children.
For has he not fine fences?  And those over yonder, why should they
build fences on the rack-rented land?  It will only increase their rent.

On we wind, through sand and pines and glimpses of old plantations,
till there creeps into sight a cluster of buildings,--wood and brick,
mills and houses, and scattered cabins.  It seemed quite a village.  As
it came nearer and nearer, however, the aspect changed: the buildings
were rotten, the bricks were falling out, the mills were silent, and
the store was closed.  Only in the cabins appeared now and then a bit
of lazy life.  I could imagine the place under some weird spell, and
was half-minded to search out the princess.  An old ragged black man,
honest, simple, and improvident, told us the tale.  The Wizard of the
North--the Capitalist--had rushed down in the seventies to woo this coy
dark soil.  He bought a square mile or more, and for a time the
field-hands sang, the gins groaned, and the mills buzzed.  Then came a
change.  The agent's son embezzled the funds and ran off with them.
Then the agent himself disappeared.  Finally the new agent stole even
the books, and the company in wrath closed its business and its houses,
refused to sell, and let houses and furniture and machinery rust and
rot.  So the Waters-Loring plantation was stilled by the spell of
dishonesty, and stands like some gaunt rebuke to a scarred land.

Somehow that plantation ended our day's journey; for I could not shake
off the influence of that silent scene.  Back toward town we glided,
past the straight and thread-like pines, past a dark tree-dotted pond
where the air was heavy with a dead sweet perfume.  White
slender-legged curlews flitted by us, and the garnet blooms of the
cotton looked gay against the green and purple stalks.  A peasant girl
was hoeing in the field, white-turbaned and black-limbed.  All this we
saw, but the spell still lay upon us.

How curious a land is this,--how full of untold story, of tragedy and
laughter, and the rich legacy of human life; shadowed with a tragic
past, and big with future promise!  This is the Black Belt of Georgia.
Dougherty County is the west end of the Black Belt, and men once called
it the Egypt of the Confederacy.  It is full of historic interest.
First there is the Swamp, to the west, where the Chickasawhatchee flows
sullenly southward.  The shadow of an old plantation lies at its edge,
forlorn and dark.  Then comes the pool; pendent gray moss and brackish
waters appear, and forests filled with wildfowl.  In one place the wood
is on fire, smouldering in dull red anger; but nobody minds.  Then the
swamp grows beautiful; a raised road, built by chained Negro convicts,
dips down into it, and forms a way walled and almost covered in living
green.  Spreading trees spring from a prodigal luxuriance of
undergrowth; great dark green shadows fade into the black background,
until all is one mass of tangled semi-tropical foliage, marvellous in
its weird savage splendor.  Once we crossed a black silent stream,
where the sad trees and writhing creepers, all glinting fiery yellow
and green, seemed like some vast cathedral,--some green Milan builded
of wildwood.  And as I crossed, I seemed to see again that fierce
tragedy of seventy years ago.  Osceola, the Indian-Negro chieftain, had
risen in the swamps of Florida, vowing vengeance.  His war-cry reached
the red Creeks of Dougherty, and their war-cry rang from the
Chattahoochee to the sea.  Men and women and children fled and fell
before them as they swept into Dougherty.  In yonder shadows a dark and
hideously painted warrior glided stealthily on,--another and another,
until three hundred had crept into the treacherous swamp.  Then the
false slime closing about them called the white men from the east.
Waist-deep, they fought beneath the tall trees, until the war-cry was
hushed and the Indians glided back into the west.  Small wonder the
wood is red.

Then came the black slaves.  Day after day the clank of chained feet
marching from Virginia and Carolina to Georgia was heard in these rich
swamp lands.  Day after day the songs of the callous, the wail of the
motherless, and the muttered curses of the wretched echoed from the
Flint to the Chickasawhatchee, until by 1860 there had risen in West
Dougherty perhaps the richest slave kingdom the modern world ever knew.
A hundred and fifty barons commanded the labor of nearly six thousand
Negroes, held sway over farms with ninety thousand acres tilled land,
valued even in times of cheap soil at three millions of dollars.
Twenty thousand bales of ginned cotton went yearly to England, New and
Old; and men that came there bankrupt made money and grew rich.  In a
single decade the cotton output increased four-fold and the value of
lands was tripled.  It was the heyday of the nouveau riche, and a life
of careless extravagance among the masters.  Four and six bobtailed
thoroughbreds rolled their coaches to town; open hospitality and gay
entertainment were the rule.  Parks and groves were laid out, rich with
flower and vine, and in the midst stood the low wide-halled "big
house," with its porch and columns and great fireplaces.

And yet with all this there was something sordid, something forced,--a
certain feverish unrest and recklessness; for was not all this show and
tinsel built upon a groan?  "This land was a little Hell," said a
ragged, brown, and grave-faced man to me.  We were seated near a
roadside blacksmith shop, and behind was the bare ruin of some master's
home.  "I've seen niggers drop dead in the furrow, but they were kicked
aside, and the plough never stopped.  Down in the guard-house, there's
where the blood ran."

With such foundations a kingdom must in time sway and fall.  The
masters moved to Macon and Augusta, and left only the irresponsible
overseers on the land.  And the result is such ruin as this, the Lloyd
"home-place":--great waving oaks, a spread of lawn, myrtles and
chestnuts, all ragged and wild; a solitary gate-post standing where
once was a castle entrance; an old rusty anvil lying amid rotting
bellows and wood in the ruins of a blacksmith shop; a wide rambling old
mansion, brown and dingy, filled now with the grandchildren of the
slaves who once waited on its tables; while the family of the master
has dwindled to two lone women, who live in Macon and feed hungrily off
the remnants of an earldom.  So we ride on, past phantom gates and
falling homes,--past the once flourishing farms of the Smiths, the
Gandys, and the Lagores,--and find all dilapidated and half ruined,
even there where a solitary white woman, a relic of other days, sits
alone in state among miles of Negroes and rides to town in her ancient
coach each day.

This was indeed the Egypt of the Confederacy,--the rich granary whence
potatoes and corn and cotton poured out to the famished and ragged
Confederate troops as they battled for a cause lost long before 1861.
Sheltered and secure, it became the place of refuge for families,
wealth, and slaves.  Yet even then the hard ruthless rape of the land
began to tell.  The red-clay sub-soil already had begun to peer above
the loam.  The harder the slaves were driven the more careless and
fatal was their farming.  Then came the revolution of war and
Emancipation, the bewilderment of Reconstruction,--and now, what is the
Egypt of the Confederacy, and what meaning has it for the nation's weal
or woe?

It is a land of rapid contrasts and of curiously mingled hope and pain.
Here sits a pretty blue-eyed quadroon hiding her bare feet; she was
married only last week, and yonder in the field is her dark young
husband, hoeing to support her, at thirty cents a day without board.
Across the way is Gatesby, brown and tall, lord of two thousand acres
shrewdly won and held.  There is a store conducted by his black son, a
blacksmith shop, and a ginnery.  Five miles below here is a town owned
and controlled by one white New Englander.  He owns almost a Rhode
Island county, with thousands of acres and hundreds of black laborers.
Their cabins look better than most, and the farm, with machinery and
fertilizers, is much more business-like than any in the county,
although the manager drives hard bargains in wages.  When now we turn
and look five miles above, there on the edge of town are five houses of
prostitutes,--two of blacks and three of whites; and in one of the
houses of the whites a worthless black boy was harbored too openly two
years ago; so he was hanged for rape.  And here, too, is the high
whitewashed fence of the "stockade," as the county prison is called;
the white folks say it is ever full of black criminals,--the black
folks say that only colored boys are sent to jail, and they not because
they are guilty, but because the State needs criminals to eke out its
income by their forced labor.

Immigrants are heirs of the slave baron in Dougherty; and as we ride
westward, by wide stretching cornfields and stubby orchards of peach
and pear, we see on all sides within the circle of dark forest a Land
of Canaan.  Here and there are tales of projects for money-getting,
born in the swift days of Reconstruction,--"improvement" companies,
wine companies, mills and factories; most failed, and foreigners fell
heir.  It is a beautiful land, this Dougherty, west of the Flint.  The
forests are wonderful, the solemn pines have disappeared, and this is
the "Oakey Woods," with its wealth of hickories, beeches, oaks and
palmettos.  But a pall of debt hangs over the beautiful land; the
merchants are in debt to the wholesalers, the planters are in debt to
the merchants, the tenants owe the planters, and laborers bow and bend
beneath the burden of it all.  Here and there a man has raised his head
above these murky waters.  We passed one fenced stock-farm with grass
and grazing cattle, that looked very home-like after endless corn and
cotton.  Here and there are black free-holders: there is the gaunt
dull-black Jackson, with his hundred acres.  "I says, 'Look up!  If you
don't look up you can't get up,'" remarks Jackson, philosophically.
And he's gotten up.  Dark Carter's neat barns would do credit to New
England.  His master helped him to get a start, but when the black man
died last fall the master's sons immediately laid claim to the estate.
"And them white folks will get it, too," said my yellow gossip.

I turn from these well-tended acres with a comfortable feeling that the
Negro is rising.  Even then, however, the fields, as we proceed, begin
to redden and the trees disappear.  Rows of old cabins appear filled
with renters and laborers,--cheerless, bare, and dirty, for the most
part, although here and there the very age and decay makes the scene
picturesque.  A young black fellow greets us.  He is twenty-two, and
just married.  Until last year he had good luck renting; then cotton
fell, and the sheriff seized and sold all he had.  So he moved here,
where the rent is higher, the land poorer, and the owner inflexible; he
rents a forty-dollar mule for twenty dollars a year.  Poor lad!--a
slave at twenty-two.  This plantation, owned now by a foreigner, was a
part of the famous Bolton estate.  After the war it was for many years
worked by gangs of Negro convicts,--and black convicts then were even
more plentiful than now; it was a way of making Negroes work, and the
question of guilt was a minor one.  Hard tales of cruelty and
mistreatment of the chained freemen are told, but the county
authorities were deaf until the free-labor market was nearly ruined by
wholesale migration.  Then they took the convicts from the plantations,
but not until one of the fairest regions of the "Oakey Woods" had been
ruined and ravished into a red waste, out of which only a Yankee or an
immigrant could squeeze more blood from debt-cursed tenants.

No wonder that Luke Black, slow, dull, and discouraged, shuffles to our
carriage and talks hopelessly.  Why should he strive?  Every year finds
him deeper in debt.  How strange that Georgia, the world-heralded
refuge of poor debtors, should bind her own to sloth and misfortune as
ruthlessly as ever England did!  The poor land groans with its
birth-pains, and brings forth scarcely a hundred pounds of cotton to
the acre, where fifty years ago it yielded eight times as much.  Of his
meagre yield the tenant pays from a quarter to a third in rent, and
most of the rest in interest on food and supplies bought on credit.
Twenty years yonder sunken-cheeked, old black man has labored under
that system, and now, turned day-laborer, is supporting his wife and
boarding himself on his wages of a dollar and a half a week, received
only part of the year.

The Bolton convict farm formerly included the neighboring plantation.
Here it was that the convicts were lodged in the great log prison still
standing.  A dismal place it still remains, with rows of ugly huts
filled with surly ignorant tenants.  "What rent do you pay here?" I
inquired.  "I don't know,--what is it, Sam?"  "All we make," answered
Sam.  It is a depressing place,--bare, unshaded, with no charm of past
association, only a memory of forced human toil,--now, then, and before
the war.  They are not happy, these black men whom we meet throughout
this region.  There is little of the joyous abandon and playfulness
which we are wont to associate with the plantation Negro.  At best, the
natural good-nature is edged with complaint or has changed into
sullenness and gloom.  And now and then it blazes forth in veiled but
hot anger.  I remember one big red-eyed black whom we met by the
roadside.  Forty-five years he had labored on this farm, beginning with
nothing, and still having nothing.  To be sure, he had given four
children a common-school training, and perhaps if the new fence-law had
not allowed unfenced crops in West Dougherty he might have raised a
little stock and kept ahead.  As it is, he is hopelessly in debt,
disappointed, and embittered.  He stopped us to inquire after the black
boy in Albany, whom it was said a policeman had shot and killed for
loud talking on the sidewalk.  And then he said slowly: "Let a white
man touch me, and he dies; I don't boast this,--I don't say it around
loud, or before the children,--but I mean it.  I've seen them whip my
father and my old mother in them cotton-rows till the blood ran; by--"
and we passed on.

Now Sears, whom we met next lolling under the chubby oak-trees, was of
quite different fibre.  Happy?--Well, yes; he laughed and flipped
pebbles, and thought the world was as it was.  He had worked here
twelve years and has nothing but a mortgaged mule.  Children?  Yes,
seven; but they hadn't been to school this year,--couldn't afford books
and clothes, and couldn't spare their work.  There go part of them to
the fields now,--three big boys astride mules, and a strapping girl
with bare brown legs.  Careless ignorance and laziness here, fierce
hate and vindictiveness there;--these are the extremes of the Negro
problem which we met that day, and we scarce knew which we preferred.

Here and there we meet distinct characters quite out of the ordinary.
One came out of a piece of newly cleared ground, making a wide detour
to avoid the snakes.  He was an old, hollow-cheeked man, with a drawn
and characterful brown face.  He had a sort of self-contained
quaintness and rough humor impossible to describe; a certain cynical
earnestness that puzzled one.  "The niggers were jealous of me over on
the other place," he said, "and so me and the old woman begged this
piece of woods, and I cleared it up myself.  Made nothing for two
years, but I reckon I've got a crop now."  The cotton looked tall and
rich, and we praised it.  He curtsied low, and then bowed almost to the
ground, with an imperturbable gravity that seemed almost suspicious.
Then he continued, "My mule died last week,"--a calamity in this land
equal to a devastating fire in town,--"but a white man loaned me
another."  Then he added, eyeing us, "Oh, I gets along with white
folks."  We turned the conversation.  "Bears? deer?" he answered,
"well, I should say there were," and he let fly a string of brave
oaths, as he told hunting-tales of the swamp.  We left him standing
still in the middle of the road looking after us, and yet apparently
not noticing us.

The Whistle place, which includes his bit of land, was bought soon
after the war by an English syndicate, the "Dixie Cotton and Corn
Company."  A marvellous deal of style their factor put on, with his
servants and coach-and-six; so much so that the concern soon landed in
inextricable bankruptcy.  Nobody lives in the old house now, but a man
comes each winter out of the North and collects his high rents.  I know
not which are the more touching,--such old empty houses, or the homes
of the masters' sons.  Sad and bitter tales lie hidden back of those
white doors,--tales of poverty, of struggle, of disappointment.  A
revolution such as that of '63 is a terrible thing; they that rose rich
in the morning often slept in paupers' beds.  Beggars and vulgar
speculators rose to rule over them, and their children went astray.
See yonder sad-colored house, with its cabins and fences and glad
crops!  It is not glad within; last month the prodigal son of the
struggling father wrote home from the city for money.  Money!  Where
was it to come from?  And so the son rose in the night and killed his
baby, and killed his wife, and shot himself dead.  And the world passed
on.

I remember wheeling around a bend in the road beside a graceful bit of
forest and a singing brook.  A long low house faced us, with porch and
flying pillars, great oaken door, and a broad lawn shining in the
evening sun.  But the window-panes were gone, the pillars were
worm-eaten, and the moss-grown roof was falling in.  Half curiously I
peered through the unhinged door, and saw where, on the wall across the
hall, was written in once gay letters a faded "Welcome."

Quite a contrast to the southwestern part of Dougherty County is the
northwest.  Soberly timbered in oak and pine, it has none of that
half-tropical luxuriance of the southwest.  Then, too, there are fewer
signs of a romantic past, and more of systematic modern land-grabbing
and money-getting.  White people are more in evidence here, and farmer
and hired labor replace to some extent the absentee landlord and
rack-rented tenant.  The crops have neither the luxuriance of the
richer land nor the signs of neglect so often seen, and there were
fences and meadows here and there.  Most of this land was poor, and
beneath the notice of the slave-baron, before the war.  Since then his
poor relations and foreign immigrants have seized it.  The returns of
the farmer are too small to allow much for wages, and yet he will not
sell off small farms.  There is the Negro Sanford; he has worked
fourteen years as overseer on the Ladson place, and "paid out enough
for fertilizers to have bought a farm," but the owner will not sell off
a few acres.

Two children--a boy and a girl--are hoeing sturdily in the fields on
the farm where Corliss works.  He is smooth-faced and brown, and is
fencing up his pigs.  He used to run a successful cotton-gin, but the
Cotton Seed Oil Trust has forced the price of ginning so low that he
says it hardly pays him.  He points out a stately old house over the
way as the home of "Pa Willis."  We eagerly ride over, for "Pa Willis"
was the tall and powerful black Moses who led the Negroes for a
generation, and led them well.  He was a Baptist preacher, and when he
died, two thousand black people followed him to the grave; and now they
preach his funeral sermon each year.  His widow lives here,--a
weazened, sharp-featured little woman, who curtsied quaintly as we
greeted her.  Further on lives Jack Delson, the most prosperous Negro
farmer in the county.  It is a joy to meet him,--a great
broad-shouldered, handsome black man, intelligent and jovial.  Six
hundred and fifty acres he owns, and has eleven black tenants.  A neat
and tidy home nestled in a flower-garden, and a little store stands
beside it.

We pass the Munson place, where a plucky white widow is renting and
struggling; and the eleven hundred acres of the Sennet plantation, with
its Negro overseer.  Then the character of the farms begins to change.
Nearly all the lands belong to Russian Jews; the overseers are white,
and the cabins are bare board-houses scattered here and there.  The
rents are high, and day-laborers and "contract" hands abound.  It is a
keen, hard struggle for living here, and few have time to talk.  Tired
with the long ride, we gladly drive into Gillonsville.  It is a silent
cluster of farmhouses standing on the crossroads, with one of its
stores closed and the other kept by a Negro preacher.  They tell great
tales of busy times at Gillonsville before all the railroads came to
Albany; now it is chiefly a memory.  Riding down the street, we stop at
the preacher's and seat ourselves before the door.  It was one of those
scenes one cannot soon forget:--a wide, low, little house, whose
motherly roof reached over and sheltered a snug little porch.  There we
sat, after the long hot drive, drinking cool water,--the talkative
little storekeeper who is my daily companion; the silent old black
woman patching pantaloons and saying never a word; the ragged picture
of helpless misfortune who called in just to see the preacher; and
finally the neat matronly preacher's wife, plump, yellow, and
intelligent.  "Own land?" said the wife; "well, only this house."  Then
she added quietly.  "We did buy seven hundred acres across up yonder,
and paid for it; but they cheated us out of it.  Sells was the owner."
"Sells!" echoed the ragged misfortune, who was leaning against the
balustrade and listening, "he's a regular cheat.  I worked for him
thirty-seven days this spring, and he paid me in cardboard checks which
were to be cashed at the end of the month.  But he never cashed
them,--kept putting me off.  Then the sheriff came and took my mule and
corn and furniture--" "Furniture?  But furniture is exempt from seizure
by law."  "Well, he took it just the same," said the hard-faced man.




VIII

Of the Quest of the Golden Fleece

  But the Brute said in his breast, "Till the mills I grind
          have ceased,
  The riches shall be dust of dust, dry ashes be the feast!

     "On the strong and cunning few
     Cynic favors I will strew;
  I will stuff their maw with overplus until their spirit dies;
  From the patient and the low

  I will take the joys they know;
      They shall hunger after vanities and still an-hungered go.
  Madness shall be on the people, ghastly jealousies arise;
  Brother's blood shall cry on brother up the dead and empty skies.

  WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY.


Have you ever seen a cotton-field white with harvest,--its golden
fleece hovering above the black earth like a silvery cloud edged with
dark green, its bold white signals waving like the foam of billows from
Carolina to Texas across that Black and human Sea?  I have sometimes
half suspected that here the winged ram Chrysomallus left that Fleece
after which Jason and his Argonauts went vaguely wandering into the
shadowy East three thousand years ago; and certainly one might frame a
pretty and not far-fetched analogy of witchery and dragons' teeth, and
blood and armed men, between the ancient and the modern quest of the
Golden Fleece in the Black Sea.

And now the golden fleece is found; not only found, but, in its
birthplace, woven.  For the hum of the cotton-mills is the newest and
most significant thing in the New South to-day.  All through the
Carolinas and Georgia, away down to Mexico, rise these gaunt red
buildings, bare and homely, and yet so busy and noisy withal that they
scarce seem to belong to the slow and sleepy land.  Perhaps they sprang
from dragons' teeth.  So the Cotton Kingdom still lives; the world
still bows beneath her sceptre.  Even the markets that once defied the
parvenu have crept one by one across the seas, and then slowly and
reluctantly, but surely, have started toward the Black Belt.

To be sure, there are those who wag their heads knowingly and tell us
that the capital of the Cotton Kingdom has moved from the Black to the
White Belt,--that the Negro of to-day raises not more than half of the
cotton crop.  Such men forget that the cotton crop has doubled, and
more than doubled, since the era of slavery, and that, even granting
their contention, the Negro is still supreme in a Cotton Kingdom larger
than that on which the Confederacy builded its hopes.  So the Negro
forms to-day one of the chief figures in a great world-industry; and
this, for its own sake, and in the light of historic interest, makes
the field-hands of the cotton country worth studying.

We seldom study the condition of the Negro to-day honestly and
carefully.  It is so much easier to assume that we know it all.  Or
perhaps, having already reached conclusions in our own minds, we are
loth to have them disturbed by facts.  And yet how little we really
know of these millions,--of their daily lives and longings, of their
homely joys and sorrows, of their real shortcomings and the meaning of
their crimes!  All this we can only learn by intimate contact with the
masses, and not by wholesale arguments covering millions separate in
time and space, and differing widely in training and culture.  To-day,
then, my reader, let us turn our faces to the Black Belt of Georgia and
seek simply to know the condition of the black farm-laborers of one
county there.

Here in 1890 lived ten thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The
country is rich, yet the people are poor.  The keynote of the Black
Belt is debt; not commercial credit, but debt in the sense of continued
inability on the part of the mass of the population to make income
cover expense.  This is the direct heritage of the South from the
wasteful economies of the slave regime; but it was emphasized and
brought to a crisis by the Emancipation of the slaves.  In 1860,
Dougherty County had six thousand slaves, worth at least two and a half
millions of dollars; its farms were estimated at three
millions,--making five and a half millions of property, the value of
which depended largely on the slave system, and on the speculative
demand for land once marvellously rich but already partially
devitalized by careless and exhaustive culture.  The war then meant a
financial crash; in place of the five and a half millions of 1860,
there remained in 1870 only farms valued at less than two millions.
With this came increased competition in cotton culture from the rich
lands of Texas; a steady fall in the normal price of cotton followed,
from about fourteen cents a pound in 1860 until it reached four cents
in 1898.  Such a financial revolution was it that involved the owners
of the cotton-belt in debt.  And if things went ill with the master,
how fared it with the man?

The plantations of Dougherty County in slavery days were not as
imposing and aristocratic as those of Virginia.  The Big House was
smaller and usually one-storied, and sat very near the slave cabins.
Sometimes these cabins stretched off on either side like wings;
sometimes only on one side, forming a double row, or edging the road
that turned into the plantation from the main thoroughfare.  The form
and disposition of the laborers' cabins throughout the Black Belt is
to-day the same as in slavery days.  Some live in the self-same cabins,
others in cabins rebuilt on the sites of the old.  All are sprinkled in
little groups over the face of the land, centering about some
dilapidated Big House where the head-tenant or agent lives.  The
general character and arrangement of these dwellings remains on the
whole unaltered.  There were in the county, outside the corporate town
of Albany, about fifteen hundred Negro families in 1898.  Out of all
these, only a single family occupied a house with seven rooms; only
fourteen have five rooms or more.  The mass live in one- and two-room
homes.

The size and arrangements of a people's homes are no unfair index of
their condition.  If, then, we inquire more carefully into these Negro
homes, we find much that is unsatisfactory.  All over the face of the
land is the one-room cabin,--now standing in the shadow of the Big
House, now staring at the dusty road, now rising dark and sombre amid
the green of the cotton-fields.  It is nearly always old and bare,
built of rough boards, and neither plastered nor ceiled.  Light and
ventilation are supplied by the single door and by the square hole in
the wall with its wooden shutter.  There is no glass, porch, or
ornamentation without.  Within is a fireplace, black and smoky, and
usually unsteady with age.  A bed or two, a table, a wooden chest, and
a few chairs compose the furniture; while a stray show-bill or a
newspaper makes up the decorations for the walls.  Now and then one may
find such a cabin kept scrupulously neat, with merry steaming
fireplaces and hospitable door; but the majority are dirty and
dilapidated, smelling of eating and sleeping, poorly ventilated, and
anything but homes.

Above all, the cabins are crowded.  We have come to associate crowding
with homes in cities almost exclusively.  This is primarily because we
have so little accurate knowledge of country life.  Here in Dougherty
County one may find families of eight and ten occupying one or two
rooms, and for every ten rooms of house accommodation for the Negroes
there are twenty-five persons.  The worst tenement abominations of New
York do not have above twenty-two persons for every ten rooms.  Of
course, one small, close room in a city, without a yard, is in many
respects worse than the larger single country room.  In other respects
it is better; it has glass windows, a decent chimney, and a trustworthy
floor.  The single great advantage of the Negro peasant is that he may
spend most of his life outside his hovel, in the open fields.

There are four chief causes of these wretched homes: First, long custom
born of slavery has assigned such homes to Negroes; white laborers
would be offered better accommodations, and might, for that and similar
reasons, give better work.  Secondly, the Negroes, used to such
accommodations, do not as a rule demand better; they do not know what
better houses mean.  Thirdly, the landlords as a class have not yet
come to realize that it is a good business investment to raise the
standard of living among labor by slow and judicious methods; that a
Negro laborer who demands three rooms and fifty cents a day would give
more efficient work and leave a larger profit than a discouraged toiler
herding his family in one room and working for thirty cents.  Lastly,
among such conditions of life there are few incentives to make the
laborer become a better farmer.  If he is ambitious, he moves to town
or tries other labor; as a tenant-farmer his outlook is almost
hopeless, and following it as a makeshift, he takes the house that is
given him without protest.

In such homes, then, these Negro peasants live.  The families are both
small and large; there are many single tenants,--widows and bachelors,
and remnants of broken groups.  The system of labor and the size of the
houses both tend to the breaking up of family groups: the grown
children go away as contract hands or migrate to town, the sister goes
into service; and so one finds many families with hosts of babies, and
many newly married couples, but comparatively few families with
half-grown and grown sons and daughters.  The average size of Negro
families has undoubtedly decreased since the war, primarily from
economic stress.  In Russia over a third of the bridegrooms and over
half the brides are under twenty; the same was true of the antebellum
Negroes.  Today, however, very few of the boys and less than a fifth of
the Negro girls under twenty are married.  The young men marry between
the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five; the young women between twenty
and thirty.  Such postponement is due to the difficulty of earning
sufficient to rear and support a family; and it undoubtedly leads, in
the country districts, to sexual immorality.  The form of this
immorality, however, is very seldom that of prostitution, and less
frequently that of illegitimacy than one would imagine.  Rather, it
takes the form of separation and desertion after a family group has
been formed.  The number of separated persons is thirty-five to the
thousand,--a very large number.  It would of course be unfair to
compare this number with divorce statistics, for many of these
separated women are in reality widowed, were the truth known, and in
other cases the separation is not permanent.  Nevertheless, here lies
the seat of greatest moral danger.  There is little or no prostitution
among these Negroes, and over three-fourths of the families, as found
by house-to-house investigation, deserve to be classed as decent people
with considerable regard for female chastity.  To be sure, the ideas of
the mass would not suit New England, and there are many loose habits
and notions.  Yet the rate of illegitimacy is undoubtedly lower than in
Austria or Italy, and the women as a class are modest.  The plague-spot
in sexual relations is easy marriage and easy separation.  This is no
sudden development, nor the fruit of Emancipation.  It is the plain
heritage from slavery.  In those days Sam, with his master's consent,
"took up" with Mary.  No ceremony was necessary, and in the busy life
of the great plantations of the Black Belt it was usually dispensed
with.  If now the master needed Sam's work in another plantation or in
another part of the same plantation, or if he took a notion to sell the
slave, Sam's married life with Mary was usually unceremoniously broken,
and then it was clearly to the master's interest to have both of them
take new mates.  This widespread custom of two centuries has not been
eradicated in thirty years.  To-day Sam's grandson "takes up" with a
woman without license or ceremony; they live together decently and
honestly, and are, to all intents and purposes, man and wife.
Sometimes these unions are never broken until death; but in too many
cases family quarrels, a roving spirit, a rival suitor, or perhaps more
frequently the hopeless battle to support a family, lead to separation,
and a broken household is the result.  The Negro church has done much
to stop this practice, and now most marriage ceremonies are performed
by the pastors.  Nevertheless, the evil is still deep seated, and only
a general raising of the standard of living will finally cure it.

Looking now at the county black population as a whole, it is fair to
characterize it as poor and ignorant.  Perhaps ten per cent compose the
well-to-do and the best of the laborers, while at least nine per cent
are thoroughly lewd and vicious.  The rest, over eighty per cent, are
poor and ignorant, fairly honest and well meaning, plodding, and to a
degree shiftless, with some but not great sexual looseness.  Such class
lines are by no means fixed; they vary, one might almost say, with the
price of cotton.  The degree of ignorance cannot easily be expressed.
We may say, for instance, that nearly two-thirds of them cannot read or
write.  This but partially expresses the fact.  They are ignorant of
the world about them, of modern economic organization, of the function
of government, of individual worth and possibilities,--of nearly all
those things which slavery in self-defence had to keep them from
learning.  Much that the white boy imbibes from his earliest social
atmosphere forms the puzzling problems of the black boy's mature years.
America is not another word for Opportunity to all her sons.

It is easy for us to lose ourselves in details in endeavoring to grasp
and comprehend the real condition of a mass of human beings.  We often
forget that each unit in the mass is a throbbing human soul.  Ignorant
it may be, and poverty stricken, black and curious in limb and ways and
thought; and yet it loves and hates, it toils and tires, it laughs and
weeps its bitter tears, and looks in vague and awful longing at the
grim horizon of its life,--all this, even as you and I. These black
thousands are not in reality lazy; they are improvident and careless;
they insist on breaking the monotony of toil with a glimpse at the
great town-world on Saturday; they have their loafers and their
rascals; but the great mass of them work continuously and faithfully
for a return, and under circumstances that would call forth equal
voluntary effort from few if any other modern laboring class.  Over
eighty-eight per cent of them--men, women, and children--are farmers.
Indeed, this is almost the only industry.  Most of the children get
their schooling after the "crops are laid by," and very few there are
that stay in school after the spring work has begun.  Child-labor is to
be found here in some of its worst phases, as fostering ignorance and
stunting physical development.  With the grown men of the county there
is little variety in work: thirteen hundred are farmers, and two
hundred are laborers, teamsters, etc., including twenty-four artisans,
ten merchants, twenty-one preachers, and four teachers.  This
narrowness of life reaches its maximum among the women: thirteen
hundred and fifty of these are farm laborers, one hundred are servants
and washerwomen, leaving sixty-five housewives, eight teachers, and six
seamstresses.

Among this people there is no leisure class.  We often forget that in
the United States over half the youth and adults are not in the world
earning incomes, but are making homes, learning of the world, or
resting after the heat of the strife.  But here ninety-six per cent are
toiling; no one with leisure to turn the bare and cheerless cabin into
a home, no old folks to sit beside the fire and hand down traditions of
the past; little of careless happy childhood and dreaming youth.  The
dull monotony of daily toil is broken only by the gayety of the
thoughtless and the Saturday trip to town.  The toil, like all farm
toil, is monotonous, and here there are little machinery and few tools
to relieve its burdensome drudgery.  But with all this, it is work in
the pure open air, and this is something in a day when fresh air is
scarce.

The land on the whole is still fertile, despite long abuse.  For nine
or ten months in succession the crops will come if asked: garden
vegetables in April, grain in May, melons in June and July, hay in
August, sweet potatoes in September, and cotton from then to Christmas.
And yet on two-thirds of the land there is but one crop, and that
leaves the toilers in debt.  Why is this?

Away down the Baysan road, where the broad flat fields are flanked by
great oak forests, is a plantation; many thousands of acres it used to
run, here and there, and beyond the great wood.  Thirteen hundred human
beings here obeyed the call of one,--were his in body, and largely in
soul.  One of them lives there yet,--a short, stocky man, his
dull-brown face seamed and drawn, and his tightly curled hair
gray-white.  The crops?  Just tolerable, he said; just tolerable.
Getting on?  No--he wasn't getting on at all.  Smith of Albany
"furnishes" him, and his rent is eight hundred pounds of cotton.  Can't
make anything at that.  Why didn't he buy land!  Humph!  Takes money to
buy land.  And he turns away.  Free!  The most piteous thing amid all
the black ruin of war-time, amid the broken fortunes of the masters,
the blighted hopes of mothers and maidens, and the fall of an
empire,--the most piteous thing amid all this was the black freedman
who threw down his hoe because the world called him free.  What did
such a mockery of freedom mean?  Not a cent of money, not an inch of
land, not a mouthful of victuals,--not even ownership of the rags on
his back.  Free!  On Saturday, once or twice a month, the old master,
before the war, used to dole out bacon and meal to his Negroes.  And
after the first flush of freedom wore off, and his true helplessness
dawned on the freedman, he came back and picked up his hoe, and old
master still doled out his bacon and meal.  The legal form of service
was theoretically far different; in practice, task-work or "cropping"
was substituted for daily toil in gangs; and the slave gradually became
a metayer, or tenant on shares, in name, but a laborer with
indeterminate wages in fact.

Still the price of cotton fell, and gradually the landlords deserted
their plantations, and the reign of the merchant began.  The merchant
of the Black Belt is a curious institution,--part banker, part
landlord, part banker, and part despot.  His store, which used most
frequently to stand at the cross-roads and become the centre of a
weekly village, has now moved to town; and thither the Negro tenant
follows him.  The merchant keeps everything,--clothes and shoes, coffee
and sugar, pork and meal, canned and dried goods, wagons and ploughs,
seed and fertilizer,--and what he has not in stock he can give you an
order for at the store across the way.  Here, then, comes the tenant,
Sam Scott, after he has contracted with some absent landlord's agent
for hiring forty acres of land; he fingers his hat nervously until the
merchant finishes his morning chat with Colonel Saunders, and calls
out, "Well, Sam, what do you want?"  Sam wants him to "furnish"
him,--i.e., to advance him food and clothing for the year, and perhaps
seed and tools, until his crop is raised and sold.  If Sam seems a
favorable subject, he and the merchant go to a lawyer, and Sam executes
a chattel mortgage on his mule and wagon in return for seed and a
week's rations.  As soon as the green cotton-leaves appear above the
ground, another mortgage is given on the "crop."  Every Saturday, or at
longer intervals, Sam calls upon the merchant for his "rations"; a
family of five usually gets about thirty pounds of fat side-pork and a
couple of bushels of cornmeal a month.  Besides this, clothing and
shoes must be furnished; if Sam or his family is sick, there are orders
on the druggist and doctor; if the mule wants shoeing, an order on the
blacksmith, etc.  If Sam is a hard worker and crops promise well, he is
often encouraged to buy more,--sugar, extra clothes, perhaps a buggy.
But he is seldom encouraged to save.  When cotton rose to ten cents
last fall, the shrewd merchants of Dougherty County sold a thousand
buggies in one season, mostly to black men.

The security offered for such transactions--a crop and chattel
mortgage--may at first seem slight.  And, indeed, the merchants tell
many a true tale of shiftlessness and cheating; of cotton picked at
night, mules disappearing, and tenants absconding.  But on the whole
the merchant of the Black Belt is the most prosperous man in the
section.  So skilfully and so closely has he drawn the bonds of the law
about the tenant, that the black man has often simply to choose between
pauperism and crime; he "waives" all homestead exemptions in his
contract; he cannot touch his own mortgaged crop, which the laws put
almost in the full control of the land-owner and of the merchant.  When
the crop is growing the merchant watches it like a hawk; as soon as it
is ready for market he takes possession of it, sells it, pays the
landowner his rent, subtracts his bill for supplies, and if, as
sometimes happens, there is anything left, he hands it over to the
black serf for his Christmas celebration.

The direct result of this system is an all-cotton scheme of agriculture
and the continued bankruptcy of the tenant.  The currency of the Black
Belt is cotton.  It is a crop always salable for ready money, not
usually subject to great yearly fluctuations in price, and one which
the Negroes know how to raise.  The landlord therefore demands his rent
in cotton, and the merchant will accept mortgages on no other crop.
There is no use asking the black tenant, then, to diversify his
crops,--he cannot under this system.  Moreover, the system is bound to
bankrupt the tenant.  I remember once meeting a little one-mule wagon
on the River road.  A young black fellow sat in it driving listlessly,
his elbows on his knees.  His dark-faced wife sat beside him, stolid,
silent.

"Hello!" cried my driver,--he has a most imprudent way of addressing
these people, though they seem used to it,--"what have you got there?"

"Meat and meal," answered the man, stopping.  The meat lay uncovered in
the bottom of the wagon,--a great thin side of fat pork covered with
salt; the meal was in a white bushel bag.

"What did you pay for that meat?"

"Ten cents a pound."  It could have been bought for six or seven cents
cash.

"And the meal?"

"Two dollars."  One dollar and ten cents is the cash price in town.
Here was a man paying five dollars for goods which he could have bought
for three dollars cash, and raised for one dollar or one dollar and a
half.

Yet it is not wholly his fault.  The Negro farmer started
behind,--started in debt.  This was not his choosing, but the crime of
this happy-go-lucky nation which goes blundering along with its
Reconstruction tragedies, its Spanish war interludes and Philippine
matinees, just as though God really were dead.  Once in debt, it is no
easy matter for a whole race to emerge.

In the year of low-priced cotton, 1898, out of three hundred tenant
families one hundred and seventy-five ended their year's work in debt
to the extent of fourteen thousand dollars; fifty cleared nothing, and
the remaining seventy-five made a total profit of sixteen hundred
dollars.  The net indebtedness of the black tenant families of the
whole county must have been at least sixty thousand dollars.  In a more
prosperous year the situation is far better; but on the average the
majority of tenants end the year even, or in debt, which means that
they work for board and clothes.  Such an economic organization is
radically wrong.  Whose is the blame?

The underlying causes of this situation are complicated but
discernible.  And one of the chief, outside the carelessness of the
nation in letting the slave start with nothing, is the widespread
opinion among the merchants and employers of the Black Belt that only
by the slavery of debt can the Negro be kept at work.  Without doubt,
some pressure was necessary at the beginning of the free-labor system
to keep the listless and lazy at work; and even to-day the mass of the
Negro laborers need stricter guardianship than most Northern laborers.
Behind this honest and widespread opinion dishonesty and cheating of
the ignorant laborers have a good chance to take refuge.  And to all
this must be added the obvious fact that a slave ancestry and a system
of unrequited toil has not improved the efficiency or temper of the
mass of black laborers.  Nor is this peculiar to Sambo; it has in
history been just as true of John and Hans, of Jacques and Pat, of all
ground-down peasantries.  Such is the situation of the mass of the
Negroes in the Black Belt to-day; and they are thinking about it.
Crime, and a cheap and dangerous socialism, are the inevitable results
of this pondering.  I see now that ragged black man sitting on a log,
aimlessly whittling a stick.  He muttered to me with the murmur of many
ages, when he said: "White man sit down whole year; Nigger work day and
night and make crop; Nigger hardly gits bread and meat; white man
sittin' down gits all. It's wrong." And what do the better classes of
Negroes do to improve their situation?  One of two things: if any way
possible, they buy land; if not, they migrate to town.  Just as
centuries ago it was no easy thing for the serf to escape into the
freedom of town-life, even so to-day there are hindrances laid in the
way of county laborers.  In considerable parts of all the Gulf States,
and especially in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, the Negroes on
the plantations in the back-country districts are still held at forced
labor practically without wages.  Especially is this true in districts
where the farmers are composed of the more ignorant class of poor
whites, and the Negroes are beyond the reach of schools and intercourse
with their advancing fellows.  If such a peon should run away, the
sheriff, elected by white suffrage, can usually be depended on to catch
the fugitive, return him, and ask no questions.  If he escape to
another county, a charge of petty thieving, easily true, can be
depended upon to secure his return.  Even if some unduly officious
person insist upon a trial, neighborly comity will probably make his
conviction sure, and then the labor due the county can easily be bought
by the master.  Such a system is impossible in the more civilized parts
of the South, or near the large towns and cities; but in those vast
stretches of land beyond the telegraph and the newspaper the spirit of
the Thirteenth Amendment is sadly broken.  This represents the lowest
economic depths of the black American peasant; and in a study of the
rise and condition of the Negro freeholder we must trace his economic
progress from the modern serfdom.

Even in the better-ordered country districts of the South the free
movement of agricultural laborers is hindered by the migration-agent
laws.  The "Associated Press" recently informed the world of the arrest
of a young white man in Southern Georgia who represented the "Atlantic
Naval Supplies Company," and who "was caught in the act of enticing
hands from the turpentine farm of Mr. John Greer."  The crime for which
this young man was arrested is taxed five hundred dollars for each
county in which the employment agent proposes to gather laborers for
work outside the State.  Thus the Negroes' ignorance of the
labor-market outside his own vicinity is increased rather than
diminished by the laws of nearly every Southern State.

Similar to such measures is the unwritten law of the back districts and
small towns of the South, that the character of all Negroes unknown to
the mass of the community must be vouched for by some white man.  This
is really a revival of the old Roman idea of the patron under whose
protection the new-made freedman was put.  In many instances this
system has been of great good to the Negro, and very often under the
protection and guidance of the former master's family, or other white
friends, the freedman progressed in wealth and morality.  But the same
system has in other cases resulted in the refusal of whole communities
to recognize the right of a Negro to change his habitation and to be
master of his own fortunes.  A black stranger in Baker County, Georgia,
for instance, is liable to be stopped anywhere on the public highway
and made to state his business to the satisfaction of any white
interrogator.  If he fails to give a suitable answer, or seems too
independent or "sassy," he may be arrested or summarily driven away.

Thus it is that in the country districts of the South, by written or
unwritten law, peonage, hindrances to the migration of labor, and a
system of white patronage exists over large areas.  Besides this, the
chance for lawless oppression and illegal exactions is vastly greater
in the country than in the city, and nearly all the more serious race
disturbances of the last decade have arisen from disputes in the count
between master and man,--as, for instance, the Sam Hose affair.  As a
result of such a situation, there arose, first, the Black Belt; and,
second, the Migration to Town.  The Black Belt was not, as many
assumed, a movement toward fields of labor under more genial climatic
conditions; it was primarily a huddling for self-protection,--a massing
of the black population for mutual defence in order to secure the peace
and tranquillity necessary to economic advance.  This movement took
place between Emancipation and 1880, and only partially accomplished
the desired results.  The rush to town since 1880 is the
counter-movement of men disappointed in the economic opportunities of
the Black Belt.

In Dougherty County, Georgia, one can see easily the results of this
experiment in huddling for protection.  Only ten per cent of the adult
population was born in the county, and yet the blacks outnumber the
whites four or five to one.  There is undoubtedly a security to the
blacks in their very numbers,--a personal freedom from arbitrary
treatment, which makes hundreds of laborers cling to Dougherty in spite
of low wages and economic distress.  But a change is coming, and slowly
but surely even here the agricultural laborers are drifting to town and
leaving the broad acres behind.  Why is this?  Why do not the Negroes
become land-owners, and build up the black landed peasantry, which has
for a generation and more been the dream of philanthropist and
statesman?

To the car-window sociologist, to the man who seeks to understand and
know the South by devoting the few leisure hours of a holiday trip to
unravelling the snarl of centuries,--to such men very often the whole
trouble with the black field-hand may be summed up by Aunt Ophelia's
word, "Shiftless!"  They have noted repeatedly scenes like one I saw
last summer.  We were riding along the highroad to town at the close of
a long hot day.  A couple of young black fellows passed us in a
muleteam, with several bushels of loose corn in the ear.  One was
driving, listlessly bent forward, his elbows on his knees,--a
happy-go-lucky, careless picture of irresponsibility.  The other was
fast asleep in the bottom of the wagon.  As we passed we noticed an ear
of corn fall from the wagon.  They never saw it,--not they.  A rod
farther on we noted another ear on the ground; and between that
creeping mule and town we counted twenty-six ears of corn.  Shiftless?
Yes, the personification of shiftlessness.  And yet follow those boys:
they are not lazy; to-morrow morning they'll be up with the sun; they
work hard when they do work, and they work willingly.  They have no
sordid, selfish, money-getting ways, but rather a fine disdain for mere
cash.  They'll loaf before your face and work behind your back with
good-natured honesty.  They'll steal a watermelon, and hand you back
your lost purse intact.  Their great defect as laborers lies in their
lack of incentive beyond the mere pleasure of physical exertion.  They
are careless because they have not found that it pays to be careful;
they are improvident because the improvident ones of their acquaintance
get on about as well as the provident.  Above all, they cannot see why
they should take unusual pains to make the white man's land better, or
to fatten his mule, or save his corn.  On the other hand, the white
land-owner argues that any attempt to improve these laborers by
increased responsibility, or higher wages, or better homes, or land of
their own, would be sure to result in failure.  He shows his Northern
visitor the scarred and wretched land; the ruined mansions, the
worn-out soil and mortgaged acres, and says, This is Negro freedom!

Now it happens that both master and man have just enough argument on
