"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thought
Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the left
side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with admiration
at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, spreading
out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and slightly
trembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fingers nor
old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now.
Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twigs,
leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran
could have produced.

"Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince Andrew, and all at once he was
seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All the
best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Austerlitz with
the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at the
ferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night, and that night
itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.

"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided
finally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I have in
me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to fly
away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that
it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"

On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series of
sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him
to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing up
in his mind. He could not now understand how he could ever even have
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month
before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country
could ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to
some kind of work and again played an active part in life. He did not
even remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical
arguments, it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if
he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe
in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness
or love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey to
Ryazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
interested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,
went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then he would
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la
grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame. She did
not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his arms
behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as he
reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly
cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.

"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "little
Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold."

"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly to
his sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he must
wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is what
follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needs
fresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as if
punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred
within him.

At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries
men up.




CHAPTER IV

Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the time
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. That same
August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his leg, and
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every day and no
one else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that
so agitated society--abolishing court ranks and introducing examinations
to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State Councilor--
and not merely these but a whole state constitution, intended to change
the existing order of government in Russia: legal, administrative, and
financial, from the Council of State down to the district tribunals. Now
those vague liberal dreams with which the Emperor Alexander had ascended
the throne, and which he had tried to put into effect with the aid of
his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Strogonov--whom
he himself in jest had called his Comite de salut public--were taking
shape and being realized.

Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and
Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The
Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic to
the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, he
now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explained
the Emperor's neglect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's
not having served since 1805.

"I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies and antipathies,"
thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my proposal for the
reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally, but the
project will speak for itself."

He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend of
his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him, received
him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days later
Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of
War, Count Arakcheev.

On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waiting
room at nine in the morning.

He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he had
heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.

"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned to
consider my project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought Prince
Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people
in Count Arakcheev's waiting room.

During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the
anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms
were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special
character. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for
an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those of
higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered by a mask
of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the person
for whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down, others
whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila
Andreevich" and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference
to Count Arakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidently
feeling offended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing
his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.

But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all faces--
that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on
duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and was told
that his turn would come in due course. After some others had been shown
in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty, an officer
who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air was
admitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted a long
time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard from
the other side of the door, and the officer--with pale face and
trembling lips--came out and passed through the waiting room, clutching
his head.

After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on
duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."

Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of
forty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrinkles,
scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red
nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him.

"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.

"I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew quietly.

Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.

"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"

"I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor has
deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."

"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted Arakcheev,
uttering only the first words amiably and then--again without looking at
Prince Andrew--relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt.
"You are proposing new military laws? There are many laws but no one to
carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easier
writing than doing."

"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from your excellency
how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," said
Prince Andrew politely.

"I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the
committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and taking a
paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.

Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
of War needlessly deviating."

"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince
Andrew.

"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that your
honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."

Prince Andrew smiled.

"I don't want one."

"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor... Eh!
Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to Prince
Andrew.




CHAPTER V

While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
knew to be in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he now
experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when
troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
being shaped. From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who was
supposed to be a man of genius--Speranski. And this movement of
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranski
its chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question of
the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his
consciousness.

Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because he
was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.
The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,
turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the
reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine
society world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a
good match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account of
his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife. Besides this the
general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had
greatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grown
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.

The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent
the evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his interview with
Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the
same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War's
anteroom).

"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael Mikhaylovich
Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has promised to
come this evening."

"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Prince
Andrew.

Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's
simplicity.

"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey continued,
"and about your freed plowmen."

"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man of
Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.

"It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Prince
Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
uselessly.

"Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.

"There's one thing I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow the
land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to
rule.... Just the same as now--I ask you, Count--who will be heads of
the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"

"Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossing
his legs and glancing round.

"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a
priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"

"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but..."

Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,
and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open
forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was just
entering. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross
suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It was Speranski.
Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within him, as
happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy,
or anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole figure was of a
peculiar type that made him easily recognizable. In the society in which
Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkward
and clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance; he had
never seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those half-
closed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed nothing;
nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all he had
never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands--hands which were
broad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness
Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long
in hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met and
talked with Napoleon.

Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people
involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to
speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, and
he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.

Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement with
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men who
judge those near to them severely, he always on meeting anyone new--
especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputation--expected
to discover in him the perfection of human qualities.

Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner
as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperor
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyes
to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence.

"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as
everyone has," he said after a pause.

Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given
Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.

"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend
Monsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word and
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He paused
at the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co-
operate in promoting all that is reasonable."

A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked
about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.

Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement
of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant divinity
student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those plump
white hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the
old man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from an
immeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud, Speranski
smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of
what pleased the sovereign.

Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranski rose
and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the
room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in
Bolkonski.

"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, during the animated
conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he said
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that he
and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom
he had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known of
you for a long time: first from your action with regard to your serfs, a
first example, of which it is very desirable that there should be more
imitators; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen of the
chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decree
concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so much
gossip and tittle-tattle."

"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take advantage
of the privilege. I began the service from the lower grade."

"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our
contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes
natural justice."

"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returned
Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he began
to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in everything and
felt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spoke easily and well, he
felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with
Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man's
personality.

"Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly.

"And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.

"What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes.

"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea
that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.
Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre des
moyens de soutenir ce sentiment." *


* "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable.
Certain rights and privileges for the aristocracy appear to me a means
of maintaining that sentiment."

The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improved
by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him.

"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue," * he began,
pronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slower
than in Russian but quite calmly.


* "If you regard the question from that point of view."

Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honneur, cannot be upheld by
privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either a
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of
emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.
His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.

"An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is one similar
to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful but
helpful to the success of the service, but not a class or court
privilege."

"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privileges
have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every courtier
considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."

"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince," said
Speranski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an
argument which was embarrassing for his companion. "If you will do me
the honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, after
talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you, and shall
also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."

Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and
trying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.




CHAPTER VI

During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the
whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite
overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city.

On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanism
of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did not
even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.

He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same
remark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busy for
whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking
of nothing.

As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranski produced
a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he received
him tête-à-tête at his own house and talked to him long and
confidentially.

To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant
creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that
perfection toward which he strove, that he readily believed that in
Speranski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous
man. Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed
the same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and
logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he
did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he
appreciated the other's capacity or because he considered it necessary
to win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption
that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness
and profundity of one's own ideas.

During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranski more than
once remarked: "We regard everything that is above the common level of
rooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fed
and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot understand this..." and
all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what they
are and who we are."

This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.
He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Speranski was the man
he would himself have wished to be--one who explained all the facts of
life reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and was
capable of applying the standard of reason to everything. Everything
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew
involuntarily agreed with him about everything. If he replied and
argued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
not submit to Speranski's opinions entirely. Everything was right and
everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
Andrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did not allow
one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which Prince
Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who
possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated
Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the
excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by the
diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions. He made
use of every kind of mental device, except analogy, and passed too
boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. Now he would
take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now that
of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely
logical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last
resource was one he very frequently employed.) He would transfer a
question to metaphysical heights, pass on to definitions of space, time,
and thought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would again
descend to the level of the original discussion.

In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrew
most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority
of reason. It was evident that the thought could never occur to him
which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is after all
impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never felt the
doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was just this
peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted Prince
Andrew.

During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a
passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for
Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest, and
that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble
origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen it.

On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the
Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty
years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf
had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes.

"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he.
"We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.
That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in these
times!"

Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was
needed which he did not possess.

"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circle
from which we must break a way out."

A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army
Regulations and--what he had not at all expected--was chairman of a
section of the committee for the revision of the laws. At Speranski's
request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up
and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian,
he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.




CHAPTER VII

Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg
after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading
position among the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funeral
lodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting various
lodges and acquiring authentic charters. He gave money for the erection
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular. He
supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in
Petersburg.

His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered
it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the
bachelor circles in which he moved.

Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre at
the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest
upon it, the more masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him.
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently
steps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot down it
sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put his
other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.

Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood aside from
the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely in
Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary
life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in
Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew in
society mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the masonic aprons
and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in
ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty to
thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen
members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
remembered the masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote all
his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to
dwell arose in his soul.

He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the first he
put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges
or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
science of the order: with questions of the threefold designation of
God, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury, and salt--or the
meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich himself,
but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mystical
aspect of Freemasonry.

In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,
seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight
and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.

In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority) who saw
nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their
purport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master
of the principal lodge.

Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,
particularly those who had lately joined. These according to Pierre's
observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire for
anything, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy
young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,
and of whom there were very many in the lodge.

Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing. Freemasonry,
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely on
externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated from
its original principles. And so toward the end of the year he went
abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order.

In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew
from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the
confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with
him much that might conduce to the advantage of the masonic cause in
Russia. The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
ingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
preparing something for them and concealing it.

A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what he
had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order. The
meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began
his address.

"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a written
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in
the seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing, but we
must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.

"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of
virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity
of purpose and possessed of authority and power.

"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice
and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these great endeavors we
are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today. What is to
be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow
everything, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that.
Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy evil
while men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs no
violence.

"The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparing
men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction--aiming
at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing talent and virtue:
raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood.
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands
of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being
aware of it. In a word, we must found a form of government holding
universal sway, which should be diffused over the whole world without
destroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside which all other
governments can continue in their customary course and do everything
except what impedes the great aim of our order, which is to obtain for
virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself.
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow
the example and instruction of the best and wisest men.

"At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preaching alone
was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with special
strength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is now
necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue a
charm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate the
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end.

"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state, each
of them again training two others and all being closely united,
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind."

This speech not only made a strong impression, but created excitement in
the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designs
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The Grand
Master began answering him, and Pierre began developing his views with
more and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy a
meeting. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others
supporting him. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by the
endless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever
presenting itself identically to two persons. Even those members who
seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
limitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he always
wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself
understood it.


* The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchical
institutions.

At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will
reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for the
usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.




CHAPTER VIII

Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For three
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
home receiving no one and going nowhere.

It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how she
wished to devote her whole life to him.

At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
return to Petersburg from abroad.

Following this letter one of the masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the
conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong and
that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
forgiving the penitent.

At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to him
imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and
that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood he then
was, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothing mattered to him.
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.

"No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," he
thought.

If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, it
was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference
whether he lived with his wife or not?

Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
Alexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:

Moscow, 17th November

I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what I
have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. No one has
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. From morning till
late at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working at
science. He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed on
which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild
smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.
I told him everything as best I could, and told him what I had proposed
to our Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had encountered, and of
my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silent
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of the
order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The
purification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and
self-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independently
of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
greatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of the
human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and
profligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground
Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the
depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he said
to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in
perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the difficulties
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary, my
dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge--for man can only know himself
by comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained by
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our
innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words are all
the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,
Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, for
which--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he does
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained
to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He
advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but to
take up only second-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while diverting
the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path self-
knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me for myself
personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end he
gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will in
future note down all my actions.

Petersburg, 23rd November

I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears and
said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her; that she
was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that if
I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing
what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to
seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do. I
went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled my
conversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ought not to
refuse a supplicant, and ought to reach a helping hand to everyone--
especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear my cross.
But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let union with
her have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and what I wrote
to Joseph Alexeevich. I told my wife that I begged her to forget the
past, to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and that I had
nothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need not know
how hard it was for me to see her again. I have settled on the upper
floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of
regeneration.




CHAPTER IX

At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at court
and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
own particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle of the
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt. In
this group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her
husband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members of
the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for
their intellect and polished manners.

Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors and
had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
had noticed her in the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbe
animal." * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise
Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did surprise
him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in
gaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que
belle." *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page
letters. Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess
Bezukhova's presence. To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon
was regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young men read books before
attending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her salon, and
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling of
perplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties, where politics,
poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties his feelings
were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found
out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just what was
needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found
pleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene
Bezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly
established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and
everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a
profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.


* "That's a superb animal."

* (2) "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."

Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was
that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one's
way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the
drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an
advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during
the last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract
interests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in his
wife's circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered his
wife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with
everybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to
them all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him
and, regardless of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present
or not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all
in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general opinion
concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman in
Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks
seriously.

Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's return
from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treated him like a
child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimes
that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris behaved with a
particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade of deference also
disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before from
the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now
protected himself from the danger of its repetition, first by not being
a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect.

"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced
her former infatuations," he told himself. "There has never been an
instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the heart"--
a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source, he believed
implicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's drawing
room (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon Pierre;
it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and freedom
of his movements.

"What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to like him very
much."

In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind
and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who did
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But
a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place
all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him and causing him
many spiritual doubts and joys.




CHAPTER X

Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during
that time:

24th November

Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By Joseph
Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
served on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dined
alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drank
moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers.
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about
B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody
laughed loudly at it.

I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me to
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family
duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.

27th November

I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,
help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
but without proper feeling. Brother Urusov came and we talked about
worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new projects. I began to
criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's words--that
a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid
is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tongue
is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary
talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty of
Rhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our talk turned to the
interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple, the seven
sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the seven gifts of the
Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the admission
took place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the
magnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.
I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feeling agitated me all
the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. I caught myself
harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to
overcome. That is why I should really like to save him from evil and
lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him did not leave
me. It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was
merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. Apart from
the fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were
members of our lodge (a question to which I could not reply) and that
according to my observation he is incapable of feeling respect for our
holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man to
desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him, but he seemed
to me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the dark
temple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words,
and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it.
I could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the
Brothers and to the Grand Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to
find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies!

